57 Every person has a right to profess, practice and propagate the religion he or she believes in. Every religious group or sect is free to manage its religious affairs. A right to propagate one s religion, however, does not mean that a person has right to compel another person to convert into his religion by means of force, fraud, inducement or allurement. Of course, a person is free to change religion on his or her own will. Freedom to practice religion does not mean that a person can do whatever he wants in the name of religion. For example, one cannot sacrifice animals or human beings as offerings to supernatural forces or gods. Religious practices which treat women as inferior or those that infringe women s freedom are not allowed. For example, one cannot force a widowed woman to shave head or wear white clothes. 
1603 That is , the pigment particles mix with the vehicle in such a way that the particles are distributed in equal distances through out the whole liquid . 
755 The Prime Minister of India is the leader of the ruling party in the Lok Sabha. From the MPs who belong to her party, the Prime Minister selects ministers to work with her to implement decisions. These ministers then take charge of different areas of government functioning like health, education, finance etc. 
1636 The water you drink now-a-days is not safe . 
828 I , along with my mother , brothers and sisters brought small bamboos . 
1506 School textbooks glorified the French and justified colonial rule. The Vietnamese were represented as primitive and backward, capable of manual labour but not of intellectual reflection; they could work in the fields but not rule themselves; they were skilled copyists but not creative. School children were told that only French rule could ensure peace in Vietnam: Since the establishment of French rule the Vietnamese peasant no longer lives in constant terror of pirates Calm is complete, and the peasant can work with a good heart. 
1114 Jordan has got roads , railways and airways . 
1217 The velocity is given by the gradient of a position vs. time graph. During the first seconds, this is 
1096 But the average percentage of oxygen and silicon in rocks is 73 . 07 % 
895 In 1969 man first landed on the moon by rocket . 
6 Through the years men developed a variety of textile materials and brought new ideas in clothing . 
149 In fine , it is the duty of a housewife to express kindness towards the servants by measuring their physical ability and psychological attitude . 
73 The runner should keep his neck and face relaxed while running . 
151 Therefore the new plant grown from this seed is not identical with the mother plant . 
1092 We should never wring the woollen clothes to take out the water . 
1331 Only clothes provide civilised people to move freely by covering their modesty . 
1883 The organ is working with the aim to respond in cyclone through maintaining communication , enhancing preparedness and raising public awareness . 
680 Fish , Frog , Man . 
275 Why did early man domesticate only some of the animals? 
308 To follow the home management process for fulfilling the demands of the family A housewife is responsible for executing , controlling , implementing and evaluating all the household activities and for performing all these tasks appropriately , a proper planning is required at first . 
675 Nutrition is the subject regarding man ' s health and food . 
1847 The density of population is very high in the districts of Dhaka , Comilla etc . whereas it is very low in Chittagong Hill Tracts , Bandarban etc . 
893 You know that a brand new bicycle has shiny handlebar and wheel rims. However, if these are accidentally scratched, the shiny coating comes off revealing a not so shiny surface beneath. You might have also seen women using ornaments, which appear to be made of gold. However, with repeated use, the gold coating wears off, revealing silver or some other metal beneath. 
300 So society consists of men . 
1437 There were steps leading to the pits . 
112 Galileo was also a remarkable craftsman. He developed a series of telescopes whose optical performance was much better than that of other telescopes available during those days. Around , he designed the first pendulum clock. In his book Starry Messenger on his astronomical discoveries, Galileo claimed to have seen mountains on the moon, the milky way made up of tiny stars, and four small bodies orbiting Jupiter. In his books Discourse on Floating Bodies and Letters on the Sunspots , he disclosed his observations of sunspots. 
593 How do you know whether the speaker is a boy or a girl? 
1568 Soil Soil is very important for living beings . 
592 If one has the habit of reading books or news paper in the bed , he should keep a table lamp with a shade . 
1884 They help in blood clotting and prevent bleeding . 
388 Usually the elder sisters take care of their younger brothers and sisters . 
1581 What is the working capital required by the farmer using modern farming methods? 
464 Digestive Glands : In man salivary glands , liver and Panereas work . 
521 We have studied about the social life of man . 
1046 This means there are no ions to conduct electricity . 
467 If the lines are nearer to the face of the person who wears it vertically , he / she will seem to have a long facial appearance . 
1295 It has roots , buds , nodes and internodes . 
1343 convection: transfer of energy through a liquid or gas by the movement of liquid or gas particles 
1387 This observation explains that plants also respond to stimulus. Some plants bloom in the morning and some at night. These respond to sunlight. When winter comes many trees shed their leaves. They respond to change in temperature. 
1225 Which are the fuels that are used in your house for cook - ing ? 
101 So it is his responsibility to maintain it . 
1967 The natural increase of population is the difference between birth rates and death rates. 
1675 Her teacher Matilda Lyngdoh responds to her questions, as other classmates join the discussion: 
325 The eighteenth century witnessed the emergence of social groups, termed the middle class, who earned their wealth through an expanding overseas trade and from the manufacture of goods such as woollen and silk textiles that were either exported or bought by the richer members of society. In addition to merchants and manufacturers, the third estate included professions such as lawyers or administrative officials. All of these were educated and believed that no group in society should be privileged by birth. Rather, a person s social position must depend on his merit. These ideas envisaging a society based on freedom and equal laws and opportunities for all, were put forward by philosophers such as John Locke and Jean Jacques Rousseau. In his Two Treatises of Government, Locke sought to refute the doctrine of the divine and absolute right of the monarch. Rousseau carried the idea forward, proposing a form of government based on a social contract between people and their representatives. In The Spirit of the Laws, Montesquieu proposed a division of power within the government between the legislative, the executive and the judiciary. This model of government was put into force in the USA, after the thirteen colonies declared their independence from Britain. The American constitution and its guarantee of individual rights was an important example for political thinkers in France. 
331 At what ages do the growth spurts take place for boys and girls? 
949 Nobody should keep paper with him for long time . 
1752 A tissue is a group of cells with similar structure and function . 
1182 What effect did the experiment with sprouted seeds have on the lime water? 
784 Table .: RDA for males and females between years and years. 
1909 It is , therefore , known as acceleration due to gravity . 
1643 . An electric heater is rated W. How much energy does it use in hours? 
865 If there is a good understanding between them , the salesmen will provide the customers with opportunity to select his required item . 
541 Some time it is washed by laundry man . 
34 Men of letters and artists , too , began to doubt the essential tenets of the Enlightenment . 
15 With the growth of industrialization , technology was pressed into in the service of the common man in Europe . 
1156 Running using bipedal position and turning around the pole . 
1590 . Heat energy is converted into other forms of energy. Give some examples. 
701 Eye Donation , a Noble Deed The cornea of a person can be donated upto six hours after his death . 
832 . No woman is an exception; she is accused, arrested, and detained in cases determined by law. Women, like men, obey this rigorous law. 
359 After winning the toss the captain of the team should inform the umpires if his team chooses to chase or dodge . 
1202 Employer is also called the owner and the employee is called the worker . 
790 Social Biology Social biology is the study of how man lives with other men , with animals and plants and how he affects each of these . 
1162 To make a plan how to perform all activities there . 
683 Therefore , women children ( especially the girl child ) and old people are poorest of the poor . 
1876 In root or shoot apex there are apical meristems . 
1683 If your answers are Yes for most of the above questions it reflects that you are in adolescence phase. 
1117 Consoling if we lose in the game . 
1412 The habitat of camel is a ) forest habitat c ) aquatic habitat d ) grass land habitat b ) desert habitat II . 
1778 They worshipped objects of nature like the Moon , the Stars and lightning , and prayed to other natural phenomena . 
1050 There are alternative sources of energy besides coal, to drive turbines, such as wind, hydropower, sun-heated steam, nuclear power and tidal energy. 
10 The runner should maintain his body balance . 
1434 We have been looking at contact forces, which include friction, normal forces, compression and tension. We are now going to look at the forces that act between bodies which do not touch. 
1533 In the given astronaut 's picture , stick your photographic face and enjoy seeing you as an astronaut . 
1664 . The Atlantic Ocean has a deep impact on the climate of Europe as well as on the life and livelihood of the people of Europe. Collect relevant information and write an essay on the theme. AS 
780 Earlier, we said that Andhra Pradesh has two houses. The second house is called the Legislative Council. It has been in existence in two spells from - and from till today. It is a permanent house. Members of this house, known as MLCs are elected for six years. After every two years, one-third of its members retire. To contest in this house, a person should be a citizen of India and above years of age. He or she should not hold any office of profit under the State or Indian government and must possess such other qualifications as may be prescribed by the Parliament. It consists of members. The Composition is as follows: 
337 The diagram of the Respiratory System of man is given here . 
1479 The Sankey diagram for an incandescent light bulb is shown below 
1080 This machine is run by electric power . 
1323 Annakutti: I find it funny that the President is the Supreme Commander of Armed Forces. I doubt if the President can even lift a heavy gun. What is the point in making the President the Commander? 
862 Both male and female have 44 autosomes , A and a pair of sex chromosome . 
1356 . Social divisions based on _________ are peculiar to India. 
249 Men wear trousers and shirts . 
840 Buying books and other things for school-going girls is a luxury he cannot afford. 
1908 The earth continues to rotate on its axis while it is revolving around the Sun . 
1430 Remove the ammeter and close the circuit again. 
378 No human being can appoint another human being as his slave . 
1560 After fertilization ovary turns into a fruit and the ovules into seeds . 
1450 Nearly two-fifth of all rural families are agricultural labourers in our country. There are some who have small plots of land while others like Thulasi are landless. 
256 He will be careful in all his performances . 
1180 These unusually fast flows of air are called storms . 
829 He is appointed by the Government . 
596 Due to lack of vitamin A man suffers from eyesight weakness . 
155 Styles in long jump : Action in the Air - Sail Technique : While in the air : After taking a jump athlete should bring both his feet forward and raise them as high as possible and body should lean forward , arms should be on side of the feet . 
239 It is thus possible to fully utilize his ability and skill in production . 
703 This may be used to rest the players who just nished g. . g. . his raid . 
1685 Hence , they are called exhaustible resources . 
1703 Have you ever seen the wires made up 
924 Agriculture is conducted here so that the farmer can sell his product in the market and earn profit . 
1260 ( b ) Fig. . - Examples of matter in solid state Fig. . Close arrangement of molecules in solid TO THINK Sponge is also a solid . 
653 DNA studies show that Neanderthal man and modern man separated years ago . 
1570 Why do you think merchants brought gifts for the king? 
1634 A. [with a smile] a scintillating performance by us. It was thrilling you know , defeating kangaroos in their home ground is a daunting task. The win is a feather in our cap. 
725 So , the adolescent boys and girls must be very confident and strong minded . 
1761 Then teacher draws two starting line at a distance of - mtrs . 
1777 a. SO + O SO b. CaCO CaO + CO c. HO + SO HSO d. Na + H O NaOH + H II . 
604 After coming back to house , if he does not like the item he may return it . 
1559 The air in the troposphere is in constant motion. As it is warmed by the Earth, the warm air moves away and gets replaced by cooler air which travels in convection currents. This is the basis for cloud formation and weather patterns. All the Earth's weather systems take place close to the Earth in the troposphere. 
1195 Now take a water filled test tube , hold it inverted over the mouth of the delivery tube and collect the oxygen in the test tube . 
1492 Effects of net force on direction of moving object 
398 The Shanars (also called Nadars) were a community of toddy tappers who migrated to southern Travancore to work under Nair landlords. As they were considered a subordinate caste , they were prohibited from using umbrellas and wearing shoes or golden ornaments. Men and women were also expected to follow the local custom of never covering their upper bodies before the upper castes. 
456 From very ancient time men have been preparing and using soap as a cleaning agent . 
282 Now let's learn how plants make seeds. In sexual reproduction, half of the male's and half of the female's genetic material (DNA) fuses (combines) to create a new individual with the combined genetic materials of the parent plants or animals. In most animals we can usually easily identify two sexes of animals: a male or a female animal, which each have male and female parts. In angiosperms, the flowers are the sexual organs of the plant. The flowers produce male and female structures that can either be on the same plant or can be on two separate plants. Let us have a closer look at the structures of flowers. 
1166 b ) Diseases of animals and birds : Some of the diseases caused by bacteria are Tuberculosis of cattle , Cholera of poultry etc . 
742 As the saying goes , he who has no eyes has nothing . 
1944 He takes tourists on trips to certain areas where they can see the wildlife and birds . 
125 She also exports tobacco , sago , different spices , coconut kernel and oil , coffee and products of cottage industries . 
260 He was an adopted son of weaving Muslim couple Neeru and Neema of Varanasi . 
1889 Plastic is also a type of chemical substance . 
1342 Bangladesh is a country of six seasons . 
548 Men fall sick after taking contaminated food . 
1882 For production and better growth of buds at the lower region in many cases the apical bud is removed . 
1843 . Right to Productive and Safe Employment: so that every worker can work according to his or her skill and capacity and work under safe conditions without endangering their health. 
14 Among the students teacher appoints one student as a policeman and ask him to stand little away from the circle . 
1534 The countries included are South and East China , the Philippines , Vietnam , Laos , Cambodia , Thailand , Myanmar , Bangladesh , India , Sri Lanka and Pakistan . 
1914 The colonisation of Vietnam by the French brought the people of the country into conflict with the colonisers in all areas of life. The most visible form of French control was military and economic domination but the French also built a system that tried to reshape the culture of the Vietnamese. Nationalism in Vietnam emerged through the efforts of different sections of society to fight against the French and all they represented. 
1290 Mitosis is also termed as equational division . 
631 Copper sulphate crystals often include water. A chemist is trying to determine the number of moles of water in the copper sulphate crystals. She weighs out of copper sulphate and heats this. After heating, she finds that the mass is . What is the number of moles of water in the crystals? (Copper sulphate is represented by ). 
1161 What objects do you think we make out of iron where these properties are desirable? 
192 The reason is very simple. In a democracy the will of the people is supreme. The minister is elected by the people and thus empowered to exercise the will of the people on their behalf. She is finally answerable to the people for all the consequences of her decision. That is why the minister takes all the final decisions. The minister decides the overall framework and objectives in which decisions on policy should be made. The minister is not, and is not expected to be, an expert in the matters of her ministry. The minister takes the advice of experts on all technical matters. But very often experts hold different opinions or place before her more than one option. Depending on what the overall objective is, the minister decides. 
1515 However , observation under microscope reveals some differences between them . 
1983 Rickets ( disorder of bones , bowed legs ) . 
1660 The scientific study of weather is called ' Meteorology ' . 
1140 Can we call these sources of energy? Why or why not? 
1231 Plants are required to absorb the primary constituents of these chemical substances from the environment . 
1491 cutting off the supply of air by using sand or blanket ; . 
1192 The left arm which bent at the elbow , also be parallel to the ground . 
1988 In March , the Indian Flag was hoisted in Kohima. But with the change of fortunes in the war, the launching of a counter-offensive by the British in the winter of - and the final defeat of Japan in the Second World War the INA movement collapsed. On August rd, , Subhash Chandra Bose is reported to have lost his life in an air crash while going from Bangkok to Tokyo. 
588 Anitha 's mother mixed jeera with wheat flour . 
405 The living style of man in pre-historic period . 
1731 Allen Octavian Hume British civil servant Umesh Chandra Banerji First President , Congress A Few Presidents of India National Congress Syed Badrudhin Tyabji Firodhshah Mehtha Objectives of the Indian National Congress : To bring together and build a strong bonding between the political activists of different parts of the nation . 
227 He has the power to recommend the removal of the Ministers to the President . 
920 Fig.. shows a sculpture panel depicting the stupa. Can you see some flying figures on the top? These are supposed to be gods from heavens who came to worship the Buddha. 
1415 This covering has several mechanisms to prevent germs . 
651 Men and women of all ages participate in this celebration . 
1315 Depending on your teacher, he or she will either make a hot box as a demonstration in class, or else you are required to design and make your own hot box. 
1535 The neutron is electrically neutral i.e. it carries no charge at all. Like the proton, it is much heavier than the electron and its mass is (slightly heavier than the proton). 
982 Your mother prepares breakfast for you every morning . 
1447 Take a piece turmeric paper. Find as many of the substances given in the table- as possible and put them on the turmeric paper one by one. You could try using other substances around you as well. 
1289 (ii) What kind of road passes by the side of village Dumri? 
1748 Mayur Varma He was a Brahmin and had been to Kanchi for his higher education . 
846 [SC / SG] A car is driven at in a municipal area. When the driver sees a traffic officer at a speed trap, he realises he is travelling too fast. He immediately applies the brakes of the car while still away from the speed trap. 
496 The trader gave me seeds and fertilisers as a loan. To pay back this loan I have to sell my paddy to him at a somewhat lower price than what I would get in the market. He has sent his agent to remind farmers who have taken loans that they will sell the paddy only to him. 
615 Hardly any labourer has his own land . 
841 The necessity of food intakes like protein , vitamin and mineral salt is essential for the grown up boys and girls . 
306 We daily starve, having had no foodgrain in our possession. The only wealth we possess is our axe. We have no clothes to cover our body with, but we pass cold nights by the fireside. We are now dying for want of food. We cannot go elsewhere. What fault have we done that the government does not take care of us? Prisoners are supplied with ample food in jail. A cultivator of the grass is not deprived of his holding, but the government does not give us our right who have lived here for generations past. 
1558 (v) On which side of the railway line do the following lie : 
1082 Further cooling of causes condensation resulting in orographic or mountain rainfall . 
1770 Activity . : Have you heard the name of Saalumarada Thimmakka ? 
1547 A flat board is required to beat clothes for washing . 
54 Her mother had prepared carrot halwa for her birthday . 
758 The Constitution does not say very much about the powers of the Prime Minister or the ministers or their relationship with each other. But as head of the government, the Prime Minister has wide ranging powers. He chairs Cabinet meetings. He coordinates the work of different Departments. His decisions are final in case disagreements arise between Departments. He exercises general supervision of different ministries. All ministers work under his leadership. The Prime Minister distributes and redistributes work to the ministers. He also has the power to dismiss ministers. When the Prime Minister quits, the entire ministry quits. 
845 But gradually , his body develops antibodies against Rh factor . 
1633 In this way people came to an understanding that earth rotates on its axis. 
91 Rayon is a man - made fibre . 
1081 Kunwar Sing Nana Saheb Consequences : Though the struggle failed , it created a long lasting effect . 
1973 The soap solution from the crutcher is dropped from the top towards the bottom in a drying tower and hot air is passed from the bottom towards the top of the tower . 
1779 Food web : Previously we came to know that any food chain cannot remain scattered in nature . 
43 When your father brings vegetables and fruits , you help him to separate them . 
1440 The population of a country decreases due to emigration . 
903 . A person needs a lens of power . dioptres for correcting his distant vision. For correcting his near vision he needs a lens of power +. dioptre. What is the focal length of the lens required for correcting (i) distant vision, and (ii) near vision? 
1298 Though the number of major industries is less in this division , thousands of small scale and medium scale industries are active here . 
1846 Find out stories prevalent in your region which are about the harmonious relationship between human beings and nature. 
1989 The stage of the embryo in which all the body parts are identifiable is called foetus. 
715 Sir John Sargeant , who was the Chairman of Central Advisory Board of Education , was the Chairman of the Commission . 
455 Example . A porter lifts a luggage of kg from the ground and puts it on his head . m above the ground. Calculate the work done by him on the luggage. 
463 In this section, we will be talking about sex cells. These are either male or female sex cells and only carry half the genetic material (DNA) of a typical cell. When these sex cells fuse the two halves from the male and the female organism make a new organism with the combined genetic material (DNA) from both. 
1473 During this time it gets very hot The temperature rises up to24 - degrees Celsius . 
1316 The value of g at the centre of the earth is zero . 
1454 Watch some videos to learn more about how normal cells turn cancerous. 
134 But the young women wear it more frequently . 
489 All living beings including man have natural rights . 
396 Try to observe a blacksmith at work. He beats a hot iron piece repeatedly till its shape changes. 
1775 After accepting sanyas , Madhvacharya toured different parts of India twice for the purpose of spreading his teachings . 
668 Continue to take his pulse every minute for minutes. 
1892 The Channar women created history by staging a struggle for the right to wear upper clothes . 
876 Fig .: Mother Goddess 
657 Imagine a conversation between a French coloniser and a Vietnamese labourer in the canal project. The Frenchman believes he is bringing civilization to backward people and the Vietnamese labourer argues against it. 
107 They live as an endoparasite in the intestine of man . 
726 A woman even if employed, has to do all these tasks. 
139 Observe Figure . and compare the structure humerus ulna metacarpals carpals radius Forelimb of Man Forelimb of crocodile Flipper of whale Wing of bird Fig. . Structure of the forelimbs of organisms 
259 Rs per shirt. The cost of running his office came to Rs per shirt. Can you calculate the profit per shirt for the garment exporter? 
1961 Who is the new member of Suresh 's family ? 
661 If the mother feels that the child does not want her to take care of or take into her lap the other child , she should refrain herself from doing it so long the child has such type of mentality . 
268 Introduction : Man is a social animal and his minimum requirement is food , clothes , shelter , medical care and education . 
1681 The Nallala copper inscription reveal that he constructed many lakes for the purposes of irrigation . 
992 The easiest method to produce plants with the characteristics of mother plants is cutting or grafting . 
1576 All through history, human societies have become steadily more interlinked. From ancient times, travellers, traders, priests and pilgrims travelled vast distances for knowledge, opportunity and spiritual fulfilment, or to escape persecution. They carried goods, money, values, skills, ideas, inventions, and even germs and diseases. As early as bce an active coastal trade linked the Indus valley civilisations with present-day West Asia. For more than a millennia, cowries (the Hindi cowdi or seashells, used as a form of currency) from the Maldives found their way to China and East Africa. The long-distance spread of disease-carrying germs may be traced as far back as the seventh century. By the thirteenth century it had become an unmistakable link. 
577 He also gave him some information about the eyes , Eye is a very sensitive part . 
105 Why is there a security guard at the gate? Enact how the watchman behaves. Who does he allow/ not allow? 
1682 Are you eager to know how all this takes place ? 
934 Self-conscious experiments with dress engaged men and women of the upper classes and castes in many parts of India. The Tagore family of Bengal experimented, beginning in the s, with designs for a national dress for both men and women in India. Rabindranath Tagore suggested that instead of combining Indian and European dress, India s national dress should combine elements of Hindu and Muslim dress. Thus the chapkan (a long buttoned coat) was considered the most suitable dress for men. 
1397 Both thumb ngers should be parallel and touching each other . 
509 As soon he crosses the starting line , the second team player in the line will hold waist of the first runner and both of them will circle the marker together and return to the starting line , when third player will hold the second runner 's waist and all the three of them circle the marker together and run back . 
1210 Toads are beneficial to human beings as the toads live on a diet of harmful insects . 
402 Suitable tools and instruments help women to perform various activities as well as grow more interest of women the housewife towards the work . 
1822 Living organisms use heat and light from the Sun . 
513 Everyone agreed that colonies had to serve the interests of the mother country. 
1646 Differences between the light microscope and transmission electron microscope 
1204 Agriculture : The slope of the most parts of the mountainous region is steep , covered with thin - soil layer with infertile soil and forest cover . 
209 . A person confessed his crime at the police station and the police locked him in jail for months. 
194 Fig. .: A fielder pulls his hands gradually with the moving ball while holding a catch. 
1785 Tidy and clean the work station thoroughly after each session. Wash instruments in hot soapy water with a sponge/scourer, rinse in the cold sink (NOT under running water) and dry with a cloth. Replace apparatus in the correct containers. Scalpel blades are to be removed, cleaned, dabbed dry with roller-towel and returned to their envelopes. 
295 If we observe very closely , we will see that a person who takes care of his teeth has a well - structured set of teeth . 
1280 This was the time when England as well as some other European countries like Spain, Portugal, France, Holland and Germany were acquiring colonies in North and South America, Africa, and Asia. The colonies contributed to the power and wealth of these European countries. 
672 While the game is played a passive chasers shall not get up without getting kho or changing his direction . 
1184 Due to their ability and efficiency they became very famous . 
700 A standard of deferred payment : Man ' s future receipts and payments are accounted for in the figures of money . 
1424 . Which type of lens forms always a virtual image? 
1460 . Describe how the issue of caste was included in novels in India. By referring to any two novels, discuss the ways in which they tried to make readers think about existing social issues. 
710 Man is in quest of understanding this change and eager to know more about inside the earth . 
1095 One pair of eyes gives vision to TWO CORNEAL BLIND PEOPLE. 
342 In a family other relatives also live besides paternal aunt and maternal uncle and aunt . 
198 At what age are boys and girls on average the same height again? How can you tell this from the graph? 
419 A child, while inserting an electric plug into the socket, did not see that there was a thin piece of aluminium foil stuck between the pins of the plug. When he turned the switch on, he noticed a spark at the plug, and at the same time, the lights went out. What could have happened to cause the spark and to make the lights go out? [ marks] 
311 To know his / her own self the child ask himself or herself , Who am I ? 
443 Any civilised nation is against the kind of clothing in use in the present time among women of our country. Indeed it is a sign of shamelessness. Educated men have been greatly agitated about it, almost everyone wishes for another kind of civilised clothing there is a custom here of women wearing fine and transparent clothing which reveals the whole body. Such shameless attire in no way allows one to frequent civilised company such clothes can stand in the way of our moral improvement. 
1928 . Temperature is the degree of hotness or coldness of an object. 
349 Jagini looked forward to the fair in the village. She loved to see and touch the pots and pans of shiny steel, bright plastic buckets, cloth printed with brilliant floral designs, and clockwork toys, all of which came from the city. The men who spread out their wares came in buses and trucks and went back at the end of the day. Why were they always on the move? She wondered. Her mother explained that they were traders people who bought things where they were made, and sold them elsewhere. 
50 Now - a - days , due to some socio - economic reasons , the housewives are also engaged in various income generating activities outside her home . 
526 Men did not cover their bodies with anything in primitive time . 
696 So he used sharp stones and bones to loosen the soil and learnt to produce his food . 
1923 Fourth grade students at Rosamond Elementary School in West Jordan , Utah went outdoors to observe the weather to record information for their school 's web site . 
1065 If the universal soul fills the whole world, it fills me too. Who am I, but a part of the world? the beggar asked. 
1557 He undertook an ambitious military expedition of conquering the world which resulted in the victory over Egypt , Babilon and Persia . 
625 The jilebi maker adds something to the jilebi mix and leaves it for sometime. It helps him to make good jalebes. What he mixes is a type of plant called yeast. 
1527 Do you nd tiny organisms moving around ? 
361 We will write some name of the workmen in the table below . 
1021 This chapter deals with one of the most difficult challenges faced by independent India poverty. After discussing this multi-dimensional problem through examples, the chapter discusses the way poverty is seen in social sciences. Poverty trends in India and the world are illustrated through the concept of the poverty line. Causes of poverty as well as anti-poverty measures taken by the government are also discussed. The chapter ends with broadening the official concept of poverty into human poverty. 
713 Attitude of the mother on the food given to the child too , makes the child eager or unconcerned towards taking that food . 
1071 Do all these variations in a species have equal chances of surviving in the environment in which they find themselves? Obviously not. Depending on the nature of variations, different individuals would have different kinds of advantages. Bacteria that can withstand heat will survive better in a heat wave, as we have discussed earlier. Selection of variants by environmental factors forms the basis for evolutionary processes, as we will discuss in later sections. 
1507 For seconds the displacement is equal to the area of the triangle below the time axis: 
387 Nature is a machine , the working of which can not be altered by man . 
1294 renewable: something of which there is an unlimited supply found in nature, or which can be reused 
460 Bullet toe Method : In this method the chaser sits on his toes , his strong feet touching the front line of the box and the other strong leg placed a little behind the strong leg . 
1848 This hard rock is available in Ranipukur and Shyampur of Rangpur district and Madhyapara of Dinajpur district . 
749 If she wants to make any change of the preplanned action , she will use her imagination and creative power . 
1058 It appears that there are three lions standing on the pillar . 
1501 http://go.uen.org/b Use a magnetic field simulator on this site to pick up iron filings and view magnetic field lines . 
1350 This means that rubbing of hands produces heat . 
1823 Forest resources have a great part to play in the economic development of the country . 
213 He participates in the council meetings and provides the required information to the council . 
1631 The total area of Bangladesh excluding rivers and forest is only 1 , 16 , 508 square kilometres . 
1319 One way to solve this problem is to make it legally binding to have a fair proportion of women in the elected bodies. This is what the Panchayati Raj has done in India. One-third of seats in local government bodies in panchayats and municipalities are now reserved for women. Now there are more than lakh elected women representatives in rural and urban local bodies. 
1271 Can you now tell why a solar eclipse does not occur on every new moon day? 
591 The person who possesses it is willing to work continuously until she succeeds . 
1920 l Search for food l Caring and protecting their race . 
1069 Observe the figure- and list out the uses of coal products in the following table .You can collect more information by discussion with elders and with your friends. 
1300 Now complete the electric circuit by closing the switch . 
624 The male gametes are found inside the pollen grains and female gametes are found in the ovule. 
111 Manor An estate consisting of the lord s lands and his mansion 
1205 How waste raw materials can be utilized is described below with examples . 
712 Flow chart showing events of sexual reproduction : Male parent Female parent Gamete production Male gametes Female gametes Fusion ( Fertilization ) Zygote Embryo Young individual Do all organisms reproduce by sexual method ? 
823 Under such circumstances , the teacher should understand the tendencies of children of this age group and play the role of an ideal teacher before them and try his / her best to solve their problems . 
1626 It never got a lesson in how to stalk and pounce on prey . 
1981 Therefore , the water closer to the moon swells up and cause high tide . 
1177 Take a cotton carry bag or a jute bag while going for shopping. 
691 At that policeman has to nd the leader . 
488 Food demand for a man is more than a woman . 
140 Also, he has to get them married at some point of time so he doesn t want to spend on their education now. 
1113 Earthworms burrow into the soil as a result air and fertilizer easily enter the soil . 
1351 Using the information in this chapter, write down in the table what type of galaxy our Milky Way Galaxy is. 
1483 The people of Travancore and Cochin were under one rule while the people of Malabar were under the Government of Madras . 
284 Sometimes in order to make the child healthy , the mother brings various types of food of a large quantity in front of the child . 
1759 Stanley was a journalist and explorer sent by the New York Herald to find Livingston, a missionary and explorer who had been in Africa for several years. Like other European and American explorers of the time, Stanley went with arms, mobilised local hunters, warriors and labourers to help him, fought with local tribes, investigated African terrains, and mapped different regions. These explorations helped the conquest of Africa. Geographical explorations were not driven by an innocent search for scientific information. They were directly linked to imperial projects. 
798 The one who remains till the end is the ' strongest sh ' and he has to be rewarded . 
1389 Condensation : Activity . : Take a little hot water in a beaker . 
65 II Semi crouch start and body position : The runner places his strong leg toe on the command ' on your mark ' . 
830 Well, Ned, we have had more good fortune than we could have expected. We might have been killed on the day when we landed, and we have spent six jolly months in wandering together as hunters on the plain. If we must die, let us behave like Englishmen and Christians. 
643 Girls of dark complexion should use clothes of light but bright colours . 
1539 The procedure to read the map according to the types and nature is also different . 
1370 c. Both steps I & II are chemical changes. 
1083 Of these almost all are wood , straw , stubbles , dry cow dung etc . 
1986 Its total population is . million ( ) . 
290 ( With dotted lines I show few more food chain links to man . 
1978 There is pleasure in doing one ' s own work . 
1834 The substances that contain different acids. are given in the table . 
517 A pharmacist in his dispensary. http://www.flickr.com/photos/@N// 
821 . In an imaginary country called Happyland, the people overthrew the foreign ruler and brought back the old royal family. They said: After all their ancestors were our kings before foreigners started ruling us. It is good that we have one strong ruler, who can help us become rich and powerful . When someone talked about democracy the wise men said it is a foreign idea. Their struggle was to throw the foreigners and their ideas out of the country. When someone demanded freedom for the media, the elders thought that too much criticism of the ruler would not help them improve their living standards. After all, the king is so kind and interested in the welfare of all the subjects. Why create problems for him. Don t we all want to be happy? 
1702 Get a small piece of a thin strip or ribbon of magnesium. Clean its tip with sandpaper. Bring the tip near a candle flame. It burns with a brilliant white light (Fig. .). When it is completely burnt it leaves behind a powdery ash. 
1276 That is why the other name of water is life . 
1674 Telangana landlordism and the armed peasant rebellion caused much concern among people in the country. Sarvodaya leader Acharya Vinoba Bhave wanted to solve the problem of land concentration through peaceful means i.e. through Bhoodan Movement. Bhoodan means donating land to the landless. He wanted to take voluntary gifts of land from the landlords and donate it to the landless. On April , Vinoba started the Bhoodan Movement. It was hailed a mile stone in the history of land reforms. As part of the Sarvodaya movement Vinobaji came to Sivarampally near Hyderabad. He walked upto Pochampally in Nalgonda district. A prayer meeting was held under the juvvi tree near the tank. In that meeting families belonging to the scheduled castes requested for land. During the meeting Vedire Ramachandra Reddy donated acres of land in the memory of his father. The first person to receive the land was Maisaiah. Inspired by this Vinobaji took upBhoodan movement and later converted into Gramdan movement. Vinobaji received lakh acres of land as donation all over the country. 
477 In boys, the muscles of the body grow more prominently than in the girls. Thus, changes occurring in adolescent boys and girls are different. 
1348 . Collect the information in the following table and discuss the reasons? 
142 To make herself a woman of striking personality , a home manager should possess some other qualities like impartiality , patience , cheerfulness , righteousness and flexibility . 
1639 Ultra violet rays , other radiations , carcinogens contained in tobacco and other substances , some kinds of virus , etc. can cause cancer . 
1421 Cockroaches , bedbugs , lice etc . spread diseases . 
16 Door of the Wittenberg church Following the invention of printing press , the Bible reached the common man . 
1334 If you put the organism in the column some other place , try to mention the place where you could find it. 
185 The commission has one chairman and five members . 
816 The wants of a rich man are more than those of an ordinary man and such wants go on increasing . 
905 If , any day , the child does not wet the bed , the mother needs to be happy and should encourage the child . 
1034 the important pollutants are : Carbon dioxide , carbon monoxide , sulphur dioxide , nitrogen oxides , chlorofluorocarbons ( CFC ) , hydrocarbons etc. . 
673 Why do you think these growth spurts took place when they did? Hint: Think back to the ages of puberty for boys and girls and how they differ. 
1809 It is now free from germs and ready for drinking . 
1291 How did this come about? What were the social and political conditions in Russia when the revolution occurred? To answer these questions, let us look at Russia a few years before the revolution. 
721 A farmer is growing some tomatoes. He heard from his daughter that plants produce glucose during photosynthesis, so he decided to see for himself. However, when he tested the leaves, he did not find much glucose, but he did find a lot of starch present. 
1126 The founder of the Mughal dynasty was Babur . 
1714 Issue of currency notes In India , Reserve Bank has the legal right to issue all currency notes except one rupee note and subsidiary coins . 
655 In addition to this , it is her prime responsibility to make her children well educated and good natured as the future of the family and society depends on them . 
537 Here , she has to consider the demands , willingness and unwillingness of the family members . 
1799 A sudden flow of charged particles between objects is called static discharge . 
1130 Production of Wootz steel required a highly specialised technique of refining iron. But iron smelting in India was extremely common till the end of the nineteenth century. In Bihar and Central India, in particular, every district had smelters that used local deposits of ore to produce iron which was widely used for the manufacture of implements and tools of daily use. The furnaces were most often built of clay and sun-dried bricks. The smelting was done by men while women worked the bellows, pumping air that kept the charcoal burning. 
1690 At this stage the INC decided not to take up issues relating to social reform as it would divide the Indian people. Reform was to be carried on through different forums. 
1027 How did the need for self-driven machines emerge in England? 
1995 Put a wire net on a tripod stand and place the beaker containing salt solution . 
1337 Its basic elements are carbon , hydrogen , oxygen and nitrogen . 
131 Loris Man Chimpanzee Gorilla Orangutan Tarsier Lemur Gibbon Monkey Prosimians Nocturnal Solitary Feeds on small insects Cercopithecoidea Diurnal Colonial life Food-fruits and leaves Hominoidea 
1138 Sometimes, megaliths contain more than one skeleton. These indicate that people, perhaps belonging to the same family, were buried in the same place though not at the same time. The bodies of those who died later were brought into the grave through the portholes. Stone circles or boulders placed on the surface probably served as signposts to find the burial site, so that people could return to the same place whenever they wanted to. 
316 The following chart gives the average rate of growth in height of boys and girls with age. The figures in columns and , give the percentage of the height a person has reached at the age given in column . For example, by the age , a boy has reached % of his probable full height, while a girl has reached % of her full 
1292 To find the temperature of an object, the bulb of the thermometer needs to be in close contact with that object. Watch the shiny line of Mercury in the tube. The highest point on the scale, at which the rise of Mercury stops , shows the temperature of the object. 
1255 How can we explain the term 'boiling point'? 
1427 Objective Describe the physical characteristics of Utah 's wetlands , forests , and deserts . 
135 Every citizen has the right to cast his or her votes . 
1480 There will be drought if it rains heavily . 
1419 There present a large nucleus and many chloroplasts . 
165 Cricket in colonial India was organised on the principle of race and religion. The first record we have of cricket being played in India is from , an account of recreational cricket played by English sailors in Cambay. The first Indian club, the Calcutta Cricket Club, was established in . Through the eighteenth century, cricket in India was almost wholly a sport played by British military men and civil servants in all-white clubs and gymkhanas. Playing cricket in the privacy of these clubs was more than just fun: it was also an escape from the strangeness, discomfort and danger of their stay in India. Indians were considered to have no talent for the game and certainly not meant to play it. But they did. 
813 He Sees that the shot does not touch the palm . 
1538 . What is this instrument? How you use this? 
819 All the characteristics of backward system of agriculture are present here in his country . 
154 To make the business or production survive he has to produce new goods , find out new sources of raw materials and widen markets for the goods . 
1441 Which of these is not the economic problem of India ? 
1157 Various aspects to each districts like their uniqueness , their agriculture , industries , tourist places and important personalities are discussed here . 
307 See the following example : A person , who has a credit balance of , in his account , is in need of , . 
1635 Migrant: Anybody who shifts from one region or country to another region within a country or to another country, usually for work or other economic opportunities. 
1957 The shell protects and supports their bodies . 
678 Sulphur was known to man from ancient period of time . 
1135 The schools sometimes are forced to accept too many students . 
1018 a ) Holozoic Nutrition : In Greek Holo means whole and Zoikos means of animals . 
579 Contribution of Photosynthesis in Human Civilization : Men survive only because photosynthesis is present in green plants . 
1760 Is there any difference in the taste without sugar? 
811 A merchant would take his coins and the bank would weigh and find out the amount of pure metal and give him receipt for this and open an account. Whenever required he could ask for the pure metal. he could also transfer some of this to another person, if required. 
1286 Ampere can be defined in another way . 
1565 Mark the flow of the river with arrows. 
159 Environment : Surroundings or the conditions under which a person or thing exists and develops his or its character. It covers both physical and cultural elements. 
1969 # The rising Minimum Support Prices (MSP) have raised the maintenance cost of procuring foodgrains by the government. Rising transportation and storage costs of the FCI are other contributing factors in this increase. 
1543 Achievements of the Indian Kabaddi team at International Sports Meets : Men 's team won the first place in the first World Cup meet . 
1172 Such uniform time is based on the central meridian of the country or the meridian on which the most important city is located . 
438 With the passing of time man ' s knowledge increased . 
1121 They have strong legs that are adapted for fast running . 
1716 least amount of light d ) estuary e ) forest f ) aquatic habitat IV . 
693 While the English cultivated a taste for Chinese tea, the Chinese became addicted to opium. People of all classes took to the drug shopkeepers and peddlers, officials and army men, aristocrats and paupers. Lin Ze-xu, Special Commissioner at Canton in , estimated that there were over million opium smokers in China. 
1620 Here is a diagram to show what is really happening to the compounds in this reaction. The purpose of the candle shown in the picture is to set the hydrogen gas alight, in other words: to provide enough energy for the reaction to start. 
114 Your friend is sitting on a chair in that room. You are not visible to him in the mirror. 
1014 The skeletal system has many other functions besides helping in movements . 
303 Right handed player places his right palm on the left , and tightens the grip . 
1758 ( What happens in the three cases ? 
143 Man has imbibed the qualities of running , throwing and jumping , right from the ancient times from Nature . 
1654 The axial skeleton is extended from the anterior end of the head to the posterior end of the body . 
1242 Earlier Pluto was the th planet of the solar system . 
1902 We will keep the school neat and clean . 
242 In the same way one who breathe fast , his life span will get reduced ( Ex : Rabbit and Dog . ) 
688 But her agricultural system is very backward and faulty . 
53 He will hear your voice . 
1907 Now , heat the colourless solution of acid and base until it dries up . 
1782 During the reorganization of states in , Kalaburagi , Bidar and Raichur districts , which were part of Hyderbad Nizam , were added to Karnataka state . 
996 He can build large rooms, with upper storeys made of baked bricks, he can get large and small wells dug, he can plant trees and thorny bushes, if necessary, he can get canals constructed for irrigation. He should ensure that water is not wasted, and that embankments are built. 
1765 Be carefull while running in the corridors or while using the staircases . 
413 Powers of the Governor : The Governor appoints the Chief Minister and , on his advice , appoints the rest of the Ministers . 
1470 Health is the key to all happiness . 
127 If she puts on a saree and a blouse of contrast colour , she will look shorter . 
585 Though Bangladesh has adequate manpower , her workers are less skilled due to the lack of proper education and training . 
1589 From these velocities, we can draw the velocity-time graph which forms a straight line. 
791 Inspite of this , man is affected by microscopic organisms . 
1127 A drawing from the book Pickwick Abroad written by G.W.M. Reynolds. Minor nineteenth-century English novelists like Reynolds, F. Marion Crawford and Marie Corelli were hugely popular in colonial India. Their novels which were historical romances, adventure stories and sensation novels were easily available and were translated and adapted into several Indian languages. Reynolds s Pickwick Abroad () was more popular in India than Dickens s original Pickwick Papers (). 
649 Man has set up artificial satellites in the space in order to acquire various knowledge about space . 
1098 These lines are known as the parallels of latitude and the meridians of longitude respectively . 
918 His attempt was to release man from the prison of a complex caste system and patterns of worship based on superstitions . 
831 In this way , gradually the duties and responsibilities of a housewife expand . 
1511 Francis Buchanan , Col. Wilkes , Mackenzie , B.L. Rice , Fleet and other European scholars have successfully recorded and preserved inscriptions , manuscripts , chronicles , testimonies and contemporary events for the re-construction of Karnataka history . 
1417 Make an inclined plane on a smooth floor, or on a table. You may use a wooden board supported by bricks, or books. [Fig. . (a)]. Put a mark with a pen at any point A on the inclined plane. Now let a pencil cell move down from this point. How far does it move on the table before coming to rest? Note down the distance. Now spread a piece of cloth over the table. Make sure that there are no wrinkles in the cloth. Try the activity again [Fig. . (b)]. 
532 If a man is not able to meet his minimum needs to lead his life , he is known as a member of particular class and the identity of that class shows poverty . 
820 G. D. Birla, the industrialists attacked colonial control over the Indian economy, and supported the Civil Disobedience Movement when it was first launched. They gave financial assistance and refused to buy or sell imported goods. Most businessmen came to see swaraj as a time when colonial restrictions on business would no longer exist and trade and industry would flourish without constraints. But after the failure of the Round Table Conference, business groups were no longer uniformly enthusiastic. They were apprehensive of the spread of militant activities, and worried about prolonged disruption of business, as well as of the growing influence of socialism amongst the younger members of the Congress. 
451 Find an average body measurements for boys and girls in each class separately (If school health record is not available you will take teachers help to measure the components perfectly) record them in your note book as per the table given below. 
1269 What do these concentric circles represent? They represent the magnetic field lines. 
1617 Figure .: A mixture of iron and sulfur 
799 The women in our country use gold ornaments . 
882 The women do the household chores as well as take part in cultivation . 
1043 Beavers have thick coats of fur with an oily covering , a layer of fat under the skin , and a special circulation system that helps keep them warm during summer and winter . 
1059 An example of a fuse. Can you see the low melting point wire inside?Different circuits need different strength currents and so we need different types of fuses. Some fuses can only handle a little bit of heat, some can handle a lot. We choose the fuse that suits the safety needs of our circuit. If the circuit overheats, the fuse will melt and break the circuit to reduce the danger of fire as well as protect electronic equipment. 
619 If a home manager possesses this quality , she will be able to draw the attention of others . 
569 The mother should hence , be careful about this . 
1101 How did the Kalyan Chalukyas encourage literature ? 
916 In this regard , at first , she would select a proper residence for keeping the members of the family in a healthy condition . 
475 How much potential energy did the hiker have at the end of her journey when she reached her original starting position? 
1094 It gives technical advice free of cost for setting up industrial plants in the country . 
801 Such man - made ecology is called artificial ecology . 
267 The science of Economics or economics has emerged as a discipline to discuss how men are engaged in different activities to earn money and how do they endeavour to satisfy unlimited wants with limited means . 
1312 These chemical compounds are absorbed by the bacteria and fungi as nutrients . 
1510 Kho - kho game is the pride of our State . 
1789 To the west of it lies the Indian Ocean and to the east of it the Pacific Ocean . 
542 She should be in touch with the physician and should keep all the instrument and medicines in right place . 
1505 But the works of painting and the services of nursing for the sake of earning money are called labour . 
626 In course of time man understood that fire provides not only light and heat at night but also keeps the wild animals away . 
1601 A man got out of the car and tried to pluck the weaver bird 's nest . 
514 In those days the landlords were actively evicting small peasants and taking over their lands to give them to new tenants at a higher rent. The sanghams became active to resist this. A notorious zamindar Visnuri Ramachandra Reddy tried to forcibly take over the land of a washerwoman, Ilamma. This was resisted effectively by the Sangham. In retaliation the zamindar fired upon a demonstration of peasants in Kadivendi village and killed Doddi Komaraiah in July . This incident sparked off the famous Telangana Armed Struggle. Sanghams were set up in village after village and processions were taken out singing songs of Doddi Komarayya. The doras and Nizam tried to violently suppress the movement. This forced the Sangham to build squads of armed fighters. They began to drive away the zamindars and set up their rule through village Panchayat. 
1284 If he thinks that want of cycle is more necessary , he can use his given money to buy the bicycle . 
1796 The ammonia formed in the cells diffuses into the blood and the blood carries it to the liver . 
1063 EXERCISES I. Four alternatives are given to each of the following incomplete statements / questions . 
869 We saw that the customs of the tribe as understood by all the adult male members of the community were very important in conducting the activities of the community. 
195 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) physics Measuring liquids Measuring cylinder Fig. . Your mother asks you to get milk from the milkman . 
363 V Pivoting : When a player holds the ball , he should x one of his feet without movement and move the other foot at any direction as many times as required . 
1624 Static friction comes into play when we try to move an object at rest relative to another surface or object. 
1662 So , we must have clear idea regarding the characteristics of living organisms , prior to have knowledge about structure . 
362 Then he carved on the stones . 
686 For example , when a man satisfies his basic wants like food , clothing , housing etc , he will then feel the wants of different goods to lead a better standard of living . 
480 What are the effects of interference of man in natural phenomenon ? 
1619 Step : ( Inhale ) Dwipada Prasanasana : ( dandasana ) Extend left leg back and join with right leg . 
1784 Economists and politicians drew two key lessons from inter-war economic experiences. First, an industrial society based on mass production cannot be sustained without mass consumption. But to ensure mass consumption, there was a need for high and stable incomes. Incomes could not be stable if employment was unstable. Thus stable incomes also required steady, full employment. 
1975 Both Bhuj and Kashmir earthquakes had magnitudes greater than .. 
1522 Procedure : ( We are going to see the objects in the classroom through the collected material . 
147 solar energy : Sun is the foremost energy source that makes life possible on our earth.Solar energy has been used by man from ancient times . 
866 Prof. Marshall : Land does not only mean the upper crust of the Earth , but the whole and forces which nature gives freely for man 's aid in land , water , in air and light and heat . 
702 He has the power to reshuffle the Cabinet . 
1886 . What problems did the Indian textile industry face in the early years of its development? 
1496 Animals break up rocks into smaller particles as they walk along. 
1730 . What are the differences between the mass of an object and its weight? 
1329 Generally wedding programmes , birthday parties and other important events are recorded in cassette which is later seen by VCP or VCR . 
1288 Plantation A large farm operated by a planter employing various forms of forced labour. Plantations are associated with the production of coffee, sugarcane, tobacco, tea and cotton. 
544 Is it right to say that now man interferes with the evolutionary process keeping nature aside ? 
457 Before starting to bathe the child , the mother needs to soak a piece of cotton in water , and squeeze water out of it . 
11 She should make a proper purchasing policy in accordance with the limited resources for fulfilling the basic requirements such as food , clothing and lodging etc . of the family members . 
233 Search for him in your heart, in the heart 
1523 . Why are rules and regulations required in the marketplace? Illustrate with a few examples. 
880 In this respect , it can be said that if the tasks are distributed according to the capability of each member , it will encourage him / her to perform the tasks to the best of his / her ability and skills helping him / her become self - reliant . 
338 Where does your mother store rice, Bengal gram, jowar wheat etc.? 
497 What is better for a democracy: A Prime Minister who can do whatever he wishes or a Prime Minister who needs to consult other leaders and parties? 
1844 b ) Write the number of atoms of each element present . 
1010 We will keep the classroom and the school premises neat and clean . 
1939 Under the Mughals, architecture became more complex. Mughal emperors were personally interested in literature, art and architecture. In his autobiography, Babur described his interest in planning and laying out formal gardens, placed within rectangular walled enclosures and divided into four quarters by artificial channels. 
1057 To bear cell sap is the main function of vacuoles . 
1432 Are there other living things besides plants and animals ? 
838 Man is mortal. Everyone has to die some day or the other. But one must resolve to lay down one s life in enriching the noble ideals of self-respect and in bettering one s human life... Nothing is more disgraceful for a brave man than to live life devoid of self-respect. 
1234 In some plants night duration is not at all a reason for flowering. They can flower any time during the year. 
344 Nanga finds her a burden but Ramlakhan ca n't find a suitable groom due to lack of money . 
1148 renewable: a renewable source of energy cannot be used up, such as water, wind, or solar power 
381 Of these , the favourable variations led to the origin of modern man . 
1733 A chemical reaction where a compound and oxygen react during burning to form a new product is called a ____________ reaction. 
908 When he blows the whistle all of you should stand near the cards inside the circle . 
671 On the command of teacher , the rst player of each team starts to move around the opponent team and then around his own team in the gure of eight pattern of and resumes his initial position . 
1709 Join all the points on the graph as shown in Fig. .. It is a straight line. This is the distance-time graph for the motion of the car. 
243 This is called universal brotherhood . 
229 A person as he / she moves along the way of his life growing in age , has to depend on various persons of the family in particular and of the society in general . 
720 As a result there is increased coastal erosion and Which other activities of man would adversely affect the marine ecosystem ? 
1019 Then Ibrahim Adil Shah of Vijayapur captured Bidar . 
554 A scuba diver has an oxygen tank on his back to breathe underwater . 
1661 Blue planet - a look at water on our planet.bit.ly/GgYEL 
855 , air pollution is defined as , ' Substances put into the air by the activity of mankind in concentration , sufficient to cause harmful effects to his health , vegetation and property ' . 
868 Haseena : Sir , some girls have jasmine owers on their Vijaya Teacher : In summer there is jasmine , in rainy season there is dahlia and in winter there is chrysanthemum . 
565 In this way , a person can perform his / her duties as a social being . 
1011 Specific Aim : Acquire new knowledge: your knowledge of the Life Sciences will grow this year as you acquire a new understanding of Life Sciences concepts, processes, phenomena, mechanisms, principles, theories, laws and models. You will see new connections between fields and topics, and learn to evaluate and analyse what you learn. 
938 The victim may look as if he is asleep but his body will not execute to any movement . 
594 Developed brain It can be understood that evolution towards modern man is not merely a biological evolution . 
265 (b) The gramabhojaka often got his land cultivated by the 
1125 hormone: chemical messengers that travel in the bloodstream to tissues and organs to affect many different reactions in the body. 
500 Thus they can give relief to some extent to their parents from pressure of duties . 
449 A person is humiliated and criticised in the society if he does not abide by the rules of the society . 
959 A man has to depend on other members of family or society from the childhood to the last day of life . 
806 Hereafter , the mother herself needs to bathe the child till the child becomes able to bathe and take care of its body by itself . 
1970 Mohammed : Rita , you make clay models . 
1950 The Great Rift Valley : A flat-bottomed valley formed by the sinking of the land between two normal faults or deep slopes is called Rift Valley . 
1974 Do you remember why the bulb glows when the electric current passes through it? Due to the heating effect of current, the filament of the bulb gets heated to a high temperature and it starts glowing. However, if the current through a circuit is too weak, the filament does not get heated sufficiently and it does not glow. And why is the current in the circuit weak? Well, though a material may conduct electricity, it may not conduct it as easily as a metal. As a result, the circuit of the tester may be complete and yet the current through it may be too weak to make the bulb glow. Can we make another tester which can detect a weak current? 
503 The Sphinx is an animal with the body of a lion and the head of a man . 
319 And for communicating that , men have not depended on their bodily activities only , they have invented new and newer technologies . 
160 They went to that person and gave him all the money they collected. 
1723 How many re ections do you see ? 
792 If they improve their farming, the zamindar immediately increases the share he takes from them. 
1106 Ukata is another of their traditional dresses made in imitation of Kimono . 
1246 national commission for Schedule tribes : The National Commission for Schedule Tribes came into existence as per the th amendment to the constitution in the year . 
478 A sweeper increases the motion of his hand by using a handle on his broom . 
432 His wish becomes the law . 
1917 Filter paper is a sieve made of paper which has very fine holes. We can filter very small particles using this type of sieve. 
1381 The study of state is the main subject matter of political science . 
1411 (c) The concentration of the electrolyte should be so adjusted as to get smooth coating. 
118 Calculate the astronaut's weight on Earth if his mass is kg. [ marks] 
589 Artificial or Man Made Fibres can be Divided into Two Categories : 
1881 Know this The water that is used for washing utensils , clothes , and vegetables can be used again for watering plants . 
991 Marx contended that philosophy must become a reality , for which man should transform the world . 
1835 Fig . Urban Transport in Vijayawada Fig . Old and new modes of transport 
86 A home satisfies man ' s needs and settles their grievances . 
774 Elder brothers and sisters will help the youngers in their studies . 
968 `` Fire has always been sacred to man . '' 
1622 The brain is covered by two membrane The outer thick , hard , translucent and blood vessels enriched membrane called dura matter and the inner thin membrane is called pia matter . 
1772 COLLECT FEATHERS OF DIFFERENT BIRDS AND DECORATE THE PEACOCK BY PASTING THE FEATHERS . 
397 Heat is required on earth to sustain lives of men and animals and to grow plants and trees . 
174 His parents were Maadarasa and Madalambike and belonged to Bagevaadi Agrahara . 
858 Baba Guru Nanak as a young man, in discussion with holy men. 
1425 If we can arrange for production of biogas , clean fuel , nice light for illuminating houses , and electricity for running TV will be available even in remote villages . 
1738 All the countries of the world , are trying to avoide the impact of green house effect . 
1754 . Patent . Warp - Weft . Tie & Dye . Co-operative Societies 
321 But women did not remain mere readers of stories written by men; soon they also began to write novels. In some languages, the early creations of women were poems, essays or autobiographical pieces. In the early decades of the twentieth century, women in south India also began writing novels and short stories. A reason for the popularity of novels among women was that it allowed for a new conception of womanhood. Stories of love which was a staple theme of many novels showed women who could choose or refuse their partners and relationships. It showed women who could to some extent control their lives. Some women authors also wrote about women who changed the world of both men and women. 
1828 We have learnt that all storms are low- pressure systems. Wind speed plays an important role in the formation of storms. It is, therefore, important to measure the wind speed. The instrument that measures the wind speed is called an anemometer 
722 . The source of all sovereignty resides in the nation, which is nothing but the union of woman and man. 
1673 Syria is also mainly an agricultural country . 
1040 We might be drinking the same water that a dinosaur drank long ago . 
1129 In order to compare the rates of expansion of different solids , the idea of coefficients of expansion is considered . 
211 Man , mosquitoes , flies , cows , birds etc . are animals . 
936 This is the biggest man made canal linking the Mediterranean Sea and Red Sea . 
367 His earmarked first problem is how to increase production . 
90 People have been interested in science from the earliest times. Early man discovered how to process natural ores into metals for ornaments, weapons and tools. At least years ago, ancient people were already using embalming fluids (chemicals) obtained from plants to preserve the bodies of dead people and animals! 
536 You might recall similar situations. For example, while taking a penalty kick in football, the player applies a force on the ball. Before being hit, the ball was at rest and so its speed was zero. The applied force makes the ball move towards the goal. Suppose, the goalkeeper dives or jumps up to save the goal. By his action the goalkeeper tries to apply a force on the moving ball. The force applied by him can stop or deflect the ball, saving a goal being scored. If the goalkeeper succeeds in stopping the ball, its speed decreases to zero. 
897 Problem of the scarcity of resources : Scarcity of resources is the root cause of all economic problems of man . 
802 Man - made first synthetic fibre is nylon . 
459 He has to deposit a minimum Tk : 100 . 00 as initial deposit with the application form . 
767 Denial of rights of men occur at different places like service arrangements , military , police , local bodies , educational institutions etc. . 
859 Taking effective and preventive measures against severe diseases man has become able to recover from his illness and avoid inevitable death . 
1740 The volume . litres is also called gram molecular volume . 
766 Each man lives in some society or other . 
1788 d. Sarojini Naidu iv) Prepared a Constitution for India in 
169 In other words , Bangla was the mother tongue of the people of East Pakistan . 
1930 Aside from the physical dangers associated with illegal electrical connections, why else are they illegal? 
1802 In this case the symbol of manganese is Mn and that of magnesium is Mg . 
839 An astronaut performs an experiment to determine the relationship between mass and weight on different planets. He takes a scale and sets off in a spaceship and measures his own weight on different planets in the solar system. The following table indicates his results. 
1712 Mount Maon of the Philippines and the Fujiama of Japan are the examples of this type of volcanoes . 
210 A merchant travelling in from Hamburg to Nuremberg to sell his goods would have had to pass through customs barriers and pay a customs duty of about per cent at each one of them. 
1993 Because in general sense mass is called weight . 
914 The earth takes a full day to complete rotation once on her axis . 
1041 Know this : Robert Boyle was the rst scientist to use the term element . 
716 The teachers are men of the highest ability and talent. They follow the teachings of the Buddha in all sincerity. The rules of the monastery are strict, and everyone has to follow them. Discussions are held throughout the day, and the old and the young mutually help one another. Learned men from different cities come here to settle their doubts. The gatekeeper asks new entrants difficult questions. They are allowed to enter only after they have been able to answer these. Seven or eight out of every ten are not able to answer. 
1953 Now you measure them with any device . 
546 She has to take active steps in implementing the activities according to the plan and monitor the implementation process taking proper steps . 
947 He would do so with the help of a clinical thermometer . 
309 Apart from holding a stick in his hand , a goalkeeper wears helmets , leg guards , kickers to kick the ball , chest protector , hand gloves , groin or pelvic protector , and arm guards . 
746 Science always has the potential to be the protector of man . 
1872 Your teacher might provide you with a large model house template for you to cut out. If not, copy the following template onto a large piece of cardboard or design your own template for making a house. 
423 Democritus' ideas about matter were ignored and forgotten for more than years, until an Englishman by the name of John Dalton reintroduced them to the scientific world in . Dalton made five claims about atoms that are still largely accepted as the truth today. Three of these claims, or postulates as they are more commonly called, tell us how to understand elements. We will get to the remaining two postulates later. Here is what Dalton taught us about elements: 
795 Political science is one of the social sciences dealing with the political activities of man . 
1541 In the preparation of food by the plants , glucose is produced and oxygen is released . 
41 As his own son 
1168 Step II: List the number of atoms of different elements present in the unbalanced equation (.). 
1321 Have a taste with your tongue , it has no taste . 
1830 The wealth that was accumulated in this way was one of the most important factors that enabled England to develop industries and establish their dominance in the world. 
370 So if one has the idea of market price , he will not be befooled by the shopkeepers . 
510 All he has to do is find a buyer for his shoes. 
739 Then it was Ramanamma who said that we should meet the Ward Councillor and protest since we elected him. 
1164 Increase of production : As a result of division of labour volume of production increases largely and the prices of commodities come down . 
662 The process of knitting sweater for six years old boy is described below . 
1657 g. . Advantages : With this posture leg and neck muscles are strengthened . 
109 In this form of businesses the owner ' s responsibilities are unlimited as he is alone to share the profit and the loss of the business . 
1349 food chain: a series of organisms linked together to show which one eats what; arrows show the flow of energy through it 
1147 Producers produce goods according to the demand of the consumers . 
843 He can tell him about the cheap rate of other shops in a polite manner , and then he may buy it at a low price . 
377 Again , when the sons and daughters start their own family life , it contracts . 
1324 Large MNCs in the garment industry in Europe and America order their products from Indian exporters. These large MNCs with worldwide network look for the cheapest goods in order to maximise their profits. To get these large orders, Indian garment exporters try hard to cut their own costs. As cost of raw materials cannot be reduced, exporters try to cut labour costs. Where earlier a factory used to employ workers on a permanent basis, now they employ workers only on a temporary basis so that they do not have to pay workers for the whole year. Workers also have to put in very long working hours and work night shifts on a regular basis during the peak season. Wages are low and workers are forced to work overtime to make both ends meet. 
1035 How does heating or cooling a gas change its pressure? 
788 So if a political party is motivated only by desire to be in power, even then it will be forced to serve the people. This is a bit like the way market works. Even if a shopkeeper is interested only in his profit, he is forced to give good service to the customers. If he does not, the customer will go to some other shop. Similarly, political competition may cause divisions and some ugliness, but it finally helps to force political parties and leaders to serve the people. 
727 Figure . : Basic stance and skill of the goal keeper VII Ball stopping skill : The goal keeper should stop his movements and maintain his basic position in a stable manner while the attacker is about to take a shot . 
1384 ) Follow through : Both hands are lifted up and ngers are pointed towards the target following the execution . 
1861 Private entrepreneurs had started industries from the beginning of the th century . 
320 Again suppose , a player changes the course of a football passing over his head towards the goal , by heading . 
762 According to our social tradition , the housewife has the responsibility to look after her father - in - law , mother - in - law , husband and children . 
1326 The time taken to complete one oscillation is called time period . 
818 If a boy occupies an item for a long time , other boys / girls will be deprived . 
1181 Railways exist in all the districts excepting the hilly districts of Rangamati , Khagrachhari , Bandarban and the districts of Barisal , Patuakhali and Barguna . 
345 How does one obtain this capital? One can either use his own savings, but more often has to take a loan. 
1663 All atoms of a particular element are identical in shape , mass and other properties , but are different from the atoms of other elements . 
1275 . A change in temperature. Aquatic organisms are used to a certain range of temperature in the water-body where they live, and a sudden marked change in this temperature would be dangerous for them or affect their breeding. The eggs and larvae of various animals are particularly susceptible to temperature changes. 
1900 Angered by this , people embraced the trees whenever someone came to cut down the trees and prevented the destruction of the forest . 
559 In this stage , she has to observe whether the work is being done accordingly and if it is not , she should take decision about further measures . 
1466 silambam Flute I CANE ( PIRAMBU ) , and various grasses and reeds like ( KORAI PUL ) . 
1976 When two solutions of different concentration are separated by a semi permeable membrane , the solvent from the dilute solution moves through the semi permeable membrane to the solution of higher concentration . 
113 It is the boys of this age who generally perform all outdoor work of the family . 
740 Suppose, you want to go to your friend s house, but you don t know the way. Your friend may make a rough drawing to show the way to his house. 
373 The statue with the body of a lion and the head of man is called . 
68 (iii) When a consumer feels that he has been exploited, he must file a case in the District Consumer Court. 
1575 The agriculture is commercial and well organised near densely populated urban areas . 
1816 A force does not always result in a change in the state of the object . 
1428 Wheat Maize The other popular crops are barley , oat and potato . 
129 In his absence vice president will presides over the meetings . 
255 In Awadh, peasants were led by Baba Ramchandra a sanyasi who had earlier been to Fiji as an indentured labourer. The movement here was against talukdars and landlords who demanded from peasants exorbitantly high rents and a variety of other cesses. Peasants had to do begar and work at landlords farms without any payment. As tenants they had no security of tenure, being regularly evicted so that they could acquire no right over the leased land. 
1054 Have you seen an aquarium or do you have an aquarium in your house ? 
188 Sound it makes wow , wow Food it eats Where it lives rice , meat kennel Relationship with man friend , guard Sl.No . 
761 Man s capacity for justice makes democracy possible, but man s inclination to injustice makes democracy necessary 
56 '' What is superior to brute force '' g. . Fishermen 's Net Note : This game can be practised as a lead up game for the game Kabaddi . 
1963 The reproductive organs of a male consists of testes, sperm ducts and penis. 
1686 But now , in my family we are only me , my husband and my two children . 
1395 The racquet is made from a blend of materials including steel , aluminum , ceramic and boron . 
1236 It is the duty of the home manager to take proper care of them . 
902 Our mother prepares food for us . 
144 A girl of bright complexion can wear clothing of any colour . 
1916 GIVE REASONS FOR YOUR ANSWER V. TRY OUT A RAINBOW IN YOUR CLASSROOM MATERIALS NEEDED : CD/DVD , Torch Light , White Sheet PROCEDURE : Paste a sheet on the wall . 
1998 PotassiumProtein synthesisEnables the opening and closing of stomata MagnesiumEssential for the synthesis of chlorophyllEnhances the activity of respiratory enzymesBrown coloured dried spots on leavesLeaf veins turn yellowPurple colour on the lower surface of leavesYellow colour between the veins of the leaf . 
156 One hundred and fifty years ago the first Indian cricketers, the Parsis, had to struggle to find an open space to play in. Today, the global marketplace has made Indian players the best-paid, most famous cricketers in the game, men for whom the world is a stage. The history that brought about this transformation was made up of many smaller changes: the replacement of the gentlemanly amateur by the paid professional, the triumph of the one-day game as it overshadowed Test cricket in terms of popularity, and the remarkable changes in global commerce and technology. The business of history is to make sense of change over time. In this chapter we have followed the spread of a colonial sport through its history, and tried to understand how it adapted to a post-colonial world. 
1755 . We would not be able to see any object around us if light does not get reflected. How do you appreciate this property of objects? 
552 In ancient times , men used to eat fire burnt food , but at present time in this civilized world , men learnt many techniques for cooking . 
789 For , he is our elected leader . 
1888 Then this vegetable are tied around with a thread and then cooked . 
781 At this stage , she has to make planning in keeping with the demands and choice of the family members and afterward she will take decision . 
1052 The Government had to abandon the policy of Laissez-faire and was forced to enact factory laws to regulate the working conditions in the factories . 
870 He led a quiet but significant social revolution and gave the watchwords One Caste, One Religion, One God for all men . 
735 ( d ) Pushing anti-tactics : - In this defensive skill , it is very important that the raider keeps complete control on his body which means the raider is made to go out of the line . 
1335 State some measures as solution to rural inoccupation . 
953 His sister and elder daughter take care of the household. 
1105 . What is a constellation? Name any two constellations. 
356 Find out why an Indian farmer does not want his son to become a farmer. 
1170 At present all the paper mills are state - owned . 
326 Side by side we also notice that a common man also follows the scientific working procedure . 
1363 Amylase converts complex carbohydrates into simple sugars . 
962 ( ( ( Hippocrates , the Father of Medicine , listed organisms with medicinal value . 
906 Oxygen is indispensable for respiration of man and other animals . 
1272 The team whose name is called has to chase and catch the other team and join as many of them as possible , while the team whose name has not been called has to turn and run to the restraining line . 
93 Nation constitutes the largest community among all the groups of man . 
834 He should move towards the direction of the ball . 
49 Which sources of water are man - made ? 
393 He would only float in it . 
1618 The power of observing , thinking , remembering and thirst for knowledge can make an individual great Intelligence is an immeasurable quality . 
1265 Let us perform an activity to study the flow of blood through arteries. 
1396 Using the dropper or pipette, add a few drops of the Biuret solution to the test tube containing albumin. 
1154 The outer layer of the pericardium is attached to the sternum and other structures in the chest cavity and helps hold the heart in place . 
734 The number of times a man breathes in a minute is called the breathing rate . 
1780 Most of the air of the atmosphere , about 75 % of the atmospheric weight , belongs to this layer . 
1418 The budget also shows how the deficit will be met if income is less than expenditure or where the surplus will be spent if income is higher than expenditure . 
1216 Your descriptions of the careers you are interested in: 
179 If mother is a service holder , she also spends money for the family . 
85 The progress in information technology has brought knowledge literally at the finger-tip of man . 
196 For the safety of the home , she should make a proper arrangement of fire extinguishing and drainage system and dumping of the refuse . 
960 Thus by , a global agricultural economy had taken shape, accompanied by complex changes in labour movement patterns, capital flows, ecologies and technology. Food no longer came from a nearby village or town, but from thousands of miles away. It was not grown by a peasant tilling his own land, but by an agricultural worker, perhaps recently arrived, who was now working on a large farm that only a generation ago had most likely been a forest. It was transported by railway, built for that very purpose, and by ships which were increasingly manned in these decades by low-paid workers from southern Europe, Asia, Africa and the Caribbean. 
581 her father was Golikere Krishnaraya and mother Tungabai . 
289 Novels for young boys idealised a new type of man: someone who was powerful, assertive, independent and daring. Most of these novels were full of adventure set in places remote from Europe. The colonisers appear heroic and honourable confronting native peoples and strange surroundings, adapting to native life as well as changing it, colonising territories and then developing nations there. Books like R.L. Stevenson s Treasure Island () or Rudyard Kipling s Jungle Book () became great hits. 
983 By using time properly , a human being can prosper in his / her personal and social life and can contribute to the economic development of the country as well . 
166 In man rod cells are few and cone cells are more in the yellow spot . 
995 With the help of science , man has developed various fields related to his life and means of livelihood . 
641 The vigorous exercise which boys get from cricket, etc., must be supplied in the case of girls by walking and skipping. 
1826 Some homes do not have drains running to a common treatment plant. They usually have a septic tank instead. These are units of waste disposal used at homes usually in villages/towns and in some individual houses in cities. 
506 In the summer season the people are busy cultivating barley, potatoes, peas, beans and turnip. The climate in winter months is so harsh that people keep themselves engaged in festivities and ceremonies. The women are very hard working. They work not only in the house and fields, but also manage small business and shops. Leh, the capital of Ladakh is well connected both by road and air. The National Highway A connects Leh to Kashmir Valley through the Zoji la Pass. Can you name some more passes in the Himalayas? 
1247 The cell works not only to maintain life , but also to maintain the existence of the organism from generation to generation . 
1151 Fig. . : Liquids take the shape of the containers they are kept in S f Properties of gases : Activity . : Tie a balloon lled with air at one end of a scale and another balloon which is not lled with air at the other end of the same scale . 
1037 Explosive force: In some plants their seed capsules mature and then 'explode', shooting the small, light seeds far away from the parent plant. 
800 Family is the smallest and the most basic group of man . 
1107 Exercises for the shoulders : Placing the ngers on the shoulders and rotating the arms . 
520 Besides these , man willingly carried many fruits and seeds from one place to another , even from one country to another . 
535 Hence the mother should consider changing the bathing procedure for sometime . 
251 He said , `` A true student will not go after money or status -- he will be committed to obtaining knowledge so that he can help humanity '' . 
1174 Cambium produces new xylem tissues towards the centre and the phloem tissues towards the periphery . 
1191 These clothes becomes dirty after using some days and are not suitable for use . 
1524 In favouarable condition moss plants grow like a green carpet covering soil , on the mountain slope . 
853 Many of the laws were implemented tardily. Due to the delay in implementation the large landlords used it to their best advantage. Using the loop holes in the Tenancy Act the Zamindars regained control over the lands from the tenants. The Zamindars after abolition continued as big landlords claiming the land as their own. 
1061 EXERCISES I. Four alternatives are given to each of the following incomplete a. Zn and HCl c. CaCO and HCl statements / questions . 
1490 Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction and include state symbols. 
1459 (b) Place a similar de-shelled egg in a concentrated salt solution and observe for minutes. The egg shrinks. Why? 
382 . A child staying in a coastal region tests the drinking water and also the seawater with his tester. He finds that the compass needle deflects more in the case of seawater. Can you explain the reason? 
1679 Every loan agreement specifies an interest rate which the borrower must pay to the lender along with the repayment of the principal. In addition, lenders may demand collateral (security) against loans. Collateral is an asset that the borrower owns (such as land, building, vehicle, livestocks, deposits with banks) and uses this as a guarantee to a lender until the loan is repaid. If the borrower fails to repay the loan, the lender has the right to sell the asset or collateral to obtain payment. Property such as land titles, deposits with banks, livestock are some common examples of collateral used for borrowing. 
1783 Do you remember learning about photosynthesis and food chains in Life and Living? This is an example of a biological system. Let's find out why. 
1307 This condition provides increasing facilities to improve the standard of living and also to speed up development activities . 
79 He places this foot at angle close with the center line . 
234 Animals , birds and man live on fruits and seeds of plants . 
844 Good health for a dancer may mean being able to stretch his body into difficult but graceful positions. 
167 She will not be able to understand all these aspects in a day . 
1455 mineral salts: chemical elements in food needed for growth and development, like, sodium, potassium, calcium, iron, phosphorous etc. 
1729 Jana Gana Mana Adhinayaka Jayahe Bharat Bhagya Vidhata Punjab Sindhu Gujarat Maratha Dravid Utkala Vanga Vindya Himachala Yamuna Ganga Ucchala Jaladhi Taranga Tava shubh naame jaage Tava shubh Ashisha Maage Gaahe tava jaya Gatha Jana Gana Mangala Dhayaka Jaya he Bharat Bhagya Vidhata Jaya he ... Jaya he ... Jaya he ... Jaya Jaya Jaya Jaya he ... . 
55 For carrying the process of production ahead , man has been accepted as a resource . 
1764 Figure .: Amphibians were the first vertebrates to colonise land. They begin their life-cycle in water, and emerge onto land as adults. 
274 Early man used this to extinguish re a ) water c ) wood b ) wind d ) stone . 
669 We can bring our mother water . 
1115 Uncle : No , Meera , I will be joining a team responsible for the launch of rockets . 
705 Here the seller controls the price and the demand of his commodity at his will . 
1803 Clothes should be separated according to plant fibre , animal fibre and synthetic fibre . 
401 Take the case of a shoe manufacturer. He wants to sell shoes in the market and buy wheat. The shoe manufacturer will first exchange shoes that he has produced for money, and then exchange the money for wheat. 
1274 After doing this exercise Laila said, Wow! Now I understand that direction is always relative to something! The same place may be east or south or north or west depending upon from where we are looking at it. 
1517 Beijing region has developed metallurgical , engineering , shipbuilding , textiles and chemical industries . 
223 He obtained land as donation from the landlords of Andhra Pradesh . 
1322 Observe the following pictures. Read the statement below the first picture and write similar statements about other pictures. Talk about them with your friends. 
447 The person giving rst aid should not allow people to from getting around the injured person which prevents the injured fresh air and stop bleeding immediately Stop bleeding if any : If the injured person is unconscious then a little water should be sprinkled on his face and bring him to a conscious state and then start to give rst aid . 
1380 Yet another type of permanent tissue is sclerenchyma. It is the tissue which makes the plant hard and stiff. We have seen the husk of a coconut. It is made of sclerenchymatous tissue. The cells of this tissue are dead. They are long and narrow as the walls are thickened due to lignin (a chemical substance which acts as cement and hardens them). Often these walls are so thick that there is no internal space inside the cell (Fig. . c). This tissue is present in stems, around vascular bundles, in the veins of leaves and in the hard covering of seeds and nuts. It provides strength to the plant parts. 
453 How does a man make sounds : There are two light diaphragms like reverse V called vocal chord in human voice machine . 
1583 Work What happens when force is applied to a marble ? 
70 An important step which led to man 's progress is the discovery of agriculture . 
399 Man made fibres include nylon, polyester, acrylic and rayon. 
1807 What is the difference between the mahajanapadas and the empires? 
1261 Naturally , market economy can not solve the entire problems . 
1836 Write the uses of rain on the lines given below . 
1228 the Contribution of the Cholas The Cholas had set up an able and efficient administrative system . 
770 At that time they need modesty scarf and loose clothes for comfortable movement . 
368 Mixing chemicals , dust , micro organisms which are harmful to man and other organisms into air is called air pollution . 
1530 What do you mean by making education professional ? 
747 Thus , the mother has to do this five times and then she has to increase it upto ten times a day . 
1786 There are records about the anthill which spreads for more than acres . 
126 Eat like a king in the morning . 
1362 This method is harder compared with the other two methods . 
979 mynas eat the insects , lion eats the deer , tiger eats men etc . 
638 I had always wanted to go to London, and my desire was stimulated by letters from an old workmate who was now working at the Old Kent Road Gas Works I finally decided to go in November, . With two friends I started out to walk the journey, filled with the hope that we would be able to obtain employment, when we get there, with the kind assistance of my friend we had little money when we started, not enough to pay for our food and lodgings each night until we arrived in London. Some days we walked as much as twenty miles, and other days less. Our money was gone at the end of the third day For two nights we slept out once under a haystack, and once in an old farm shed On arrival in London we tried to find my friend but were unsuccessful. Our money was gone, so there was nothing for us to do but to walk around until late at night, and then try to find some place to sleep. We found an old building and slept in it that night. The next day, Sunday, late in the afternoon, we got to the Old Kent Gas Works, and applied for work. To my great surprise, the man we had been looking for was working at the time. He spoke to the foreman and I was given a job. 
161 If a home manager acquires this quality , she will be able to behave well with others and convince all . 
656 The most popular historical novelist in Tamil was R. Krishnamurthy who wrote under the pen-name Kalki . He was an active participant in the freedom movement and the editor of the widely read Tamil magazines Anandavikatan and Kalki. Written in simple language and full of heroism, adventure and suspense, Kalki s novels captivated the Tamil-reading public of an entire generation. 
1465 List out the ways and means to reduce noise . 
1692 During cooking heat destroys most of the harmful bacteria that exists in the raw foodstuff . 
1869 The self sacrifice of Potti Sreeramulu in Andhra accelerated the process of state formation on linguistic basis . 
314 He beats the bow to the rhythm set for the song . 
925 Especially for selection of clothing for women and adolescent girls , the facial structure should be given importance . 
1171 The hindrances and aids to over come these hindrances are discussed below . 
1268 Myopia sight ) , hypermetropia ( long sight ) etc. . 
1722 . Give examples which indicate that nylon fibres are very strong. 
1556 These are the needs for food , clothes , comfort , recreation , hobbies etc . 
1959 . Coconut is also a fibre. Name somethings made of coconut fibre. 
186 When he approaches the bank he is permitted to withdraw , . 
848 The shop keeper replied that his own arm was the standard for measuring. 
1552 Rotation of crops Rotation of crops is one of the oldest and effective methods for maintaining soil productivity . 
1613 Which way does the smoke flow when the incense stick is kept a little above the candle? 
1263 Hold a north pole and a south pole close together. What do you notice? 
1477 In , on the occasion of the Independence Day , the Prime Minister announced Sampurna Rozgar Yojana of Rs . 
76 The cell which results after fusion of the gametes is called a zygote. The process of fusion of male and female gametes (to form a zygote) is called fertilisation (Fig. .). The zygote develops into an embryo. 
1929 Again , many are younger than us . 
421 In our country, the Parliament consists of two Houses. The two Houses are known as the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) and the House of the People (Lok Sabha). The President of India is a part of the Parliament, although she is not a member of either House. That is why all laws made in the Houses come into force only after they receive the assent of the President. 
584 When a cytologist carries research on cell he applies advanced biochemical technique . 
1580 There are two major types of root system. 
1943 culture is continuous : Every culture grows imbibing new aspects into it . 
1710 -Nucleus: controls metabolism of the cell and contains hereditary information. 
1393 It is also found in different types of nuts . 
1258 The garden lizard has ears but no _________ . 
1587 Aerial photography started in India after the attainment of Independence . 
1868 Since food crops could be grown with little effort , the northern hilly tribes and the southern nomadic tribes of the desert tried to establish control over this area . 
1553 Methods of separating substances of a mixture : . 
1854 The hills of the north are locally known as Tila . 
1109 (d) Why is the Earth called a unique planet? 
104 He got people from his village, ensured them jobs, helped them settle in the city and provided them money in times of crisis. The jobber therefore became a person with some authority and power. He began demanding money and gifts for his favour and controlling the lives of workers. 
383 Means to satisfy the wants are scarce : To every man in the society the means or resources to satisfy wants are limited . 
1571 Two of his sons help him in his work . 
1911 According to 2001 census , Bangladesh has got 12 . 93 crore , the rate of increase is 1 . 48 per cent and the density of population is about 876 persons per square kilometre . 
1562 . Create a posture that reflects girls education and its importance. AS 
1376 In the economic sphere, liberalism stood for the freedom of markets and the abolition of state-imposed restrictions on the movement of goods and capital. During the nineteenth century this was a strong demand of the emerging middle classes. Let us take the example of the German-speaking regions in the first half of the nineteenth century. Napoleon s administrative measures had created out of countless small principalities a confederation of states. Each of these possessed its own currency, and weights and measures. 
1391 The Islamic year begins on the first day of the month of Muharram. It is counted from the year of the Hegira (Anno Hegirae), when Muhammad emigrated from Mecca to Medina ( July AD). 
1196 He was a hero of hundred battles , who bore scars of war on his body . 
1484 Fig. Changes in clothing in the early twentieth century 
1666 electric fuse Fig . PRINCIPlE AND WORKINg The electric fuse works on the principle of heating effect of electric current . 
637 Anyone who failed to pay the revenue lost his zamindari. 
332 His parents were Keshava Dikshit and kantimathi . 
1344 All the biomes or the living things in the earth collectively form biosphere . 
1360 In general, coastal areas experience less contrasts in temperature conditions. Seasonal contrasts are more in the interior of the country. There is decrease in rainfall generally from east to west in the Northern Plains. These variations have given rise to variety in lives of people in terms of the food they eat, the clothes they wear and also the kind of houses they live in. 
1311 The endosperm is triploid i . e . three nuclei fused together to form it . 
294 A scientist is given solutions labelled A to F. The scientist tests each solution with universal indicator and records her results as follows: 
1696 Kolar has the hot climate whereas Shivamogga region gets highest rainfall . 
658 The tenure under which land was taken from him for cultivation after depositing a certain amount of money as security to the landlord was called Kanam . 
793 The method of information that has revolutionized the modern man ' s life is the computer network . 
133 A radical nationalist, with socialist leanings, Bose did not share Gandhiji s ideal of ahimsa, though he respected him as the Father of the Nation . In January , he secretly left his Calcutta home, went to Singapore, via Germany, and raised the Azad Hind Fauj or the Indian National Army (INA), to free India from British control. In the INA tried to invade India through Imphal and Kohima but the campaign failed. The INA members were imprisoned and tried. People across the country, from all walks of life, participated in the movement against the INA trials. 
560 The new plants generally bear the characteristics of mother plants . 
69 His term of office is five years . 
1283 Many countries of the world included the Fundamental Rights in their Constitution in order to protect Human Rights . 
558 The mother must take special care of the elder child if it wets the bed due to the arrival of younger brother or sister in the family . 
1112 You will see that when water inside and outside the cylinder comes to the same level , the disc falls down spontaneously . 
1500 Plastics , several types of toxic waste and ef uents of industries are dumped into the river water . 
206 Muslim Sultans and Padshahs did not claim to be incarnations of god but Persian court chronicles described the Sultan as the Shadow of God . An inscription in the Quwwat al-Islam mosque explained that God chose Alauddin as a king because he had the qualities of Moses and Solomon, the great lawgivers of the past. The greatest lawgiver and architect was God Himself. He created the world out of chaos and introduced order and symmetry. 
1189 Can you think of some more gadgets which work on electricity ? 
1857 Add methylene blue stain on the curd smear and leave it for min . 
117 Both family and society consist of man . 
84 When a teacher explains something to his or her students in class , he talks to them . 
231 Try to make fire by striking two flint stones near cotton or dry leaves to get a feel of earliest man s life. 
1640 Again , if the difference in concentration is less , the rate of diffusion will be lower . 
425 d ) Parasitic nutrition : If you have lice in your hair , your mother tries to get rid off them by applying medicine . 
1680 Position : Lift right leg up in hoshiyar position and join the lezium at the right side . 
1719 So he ordered reshifting of the capital and the people to Delhi . 
1996 Bring both the ends of threads together and put a knot at both ends of threads . 
967 Early man protected himself against sun light , rain , wind and wild animals by living in caves and bushes . 
1605 We can see that different appliances have different power ratings and so require more electricity to run. This means that some appliances are more expensive to run than others. An incandescent light bulb, for example, is more expensive to use than a fluorescent light bulb. If you remember, an incandescent light bulb loses most of its energy as heat, instead of light. 
783 The headmen lost their position of importance with the election of Sarpanches through general elections. 
379 The aim is to take the bone and run back to his team without being caught , that team scores one point or the player succeeding in touching the player taking the bone , before he can reach home scores one point . 
207 . Prepare a questionaire to take interview of a yoga teacher or PET sir about asanas and exercises. 
1198 Asian countries like China and Vietnam and many countries of Africa came under the influence of socialism . 
1084 The stem is green , brownish grey or brown in colour . 
927 INVENTION OF FIRE In the beginning man was scared of the forest fire and the lightning as he did not and could not understand them . 
1630 We often know if a food is healthy or unhealthy. List at least healthy and unhealthy foods in the following table. 
63 . The table below shows the data on likely heights of boys and girls as they grow in age. Draw graphs showing height and age for both boys and girls on the same graph paper. What conclusions can be drawn from these graphs? 
760 The flowers and fruits of new plants bear the similar characteristics as those of its mother plant . 
1005 c. washing soda does not form crystals . 
454 The health of a person helps him to realise his potential and the ability to fight illness. 
1193 Note how the intersecting channels on the path create the characteristic chahar bagh design. 
1238 and decreasing soil fertility by releasing nitrogen fixed in the soil as nitrogen gas . 
484 In man the respiratory system . consists of nasal aperture , pharynx , larynx , trachea , bronchus , bronchiole and a pair of lungs made of alveoli . 
1700 (ii) dwarf broiler parent for commercial chick production; 
78 around. At about oclock in the morning there is a lot of activity on the beach. This is the time when the catamarans return with their catch and women gather to buy and sell fish. 
1866 Educational Unemployment : Urban Unemployment The situation of educational unemployment has emerged due to extension of educational facilities and erratic educating system . 
824 You and your friend can communicate with this phone now. Stand away from each other so that the string is tightly held. One of you can speak in the cup while the other can listen by putting the cup on his ear. 
1625 Take a magnifying lens and try to form an image of a tree on a white drawing sheet. 
1918 Identify the odd item and write it under Column B. Write the common features of the other two under Column C. . 
993 He wants to know the logical answers of these questions . 
1880 It is all very well to say that very dissimilar-looking structures evolve from a common ancestral design. It is true that analysis of the organ structure in fossils allows us to make estimates of how far back evolutionary relationships go. But those are guesses about what happened in history. Are there any current examples of such a process? The wild cabbage plant is a good example. Humans have, over more than two thousand years, cultivated wild cabbage as a food plant, and generated different vegetables from it by selection (see Fig. .). This is, of course, artificial selection rather than natural selection. So some farmers have wanted to select for very short distances between leaves, and have bred the cabbage we eat. Some have wanted to select for arrested flower development, and have bred broccoli, or for sterile flowers, and have made the cauliflower. Some have selected for swollen parts, and come up with kohlrabi. Some have simply looked for slightly larger leaves, and come up with a leafy vegetable called kale. Would we have thought that all these structures are descended from the same ancestor if we had not done it ourselves? 
1819 At one time the tail of the toad completely disappears . 
491 Sivaraman plans to send his son to school when he comes of age. His 
1159 There is a lot of concern over the use of Mercury in thermometer. Mercury is a toxic substance and is very difficult to dispose of if a thermometer breaks. These days digital thermometers are also available which do not use Mercury. 
1314 Carefully study the above photos of different animals that form part of the phylum mollusca. 
782 He cannot move his arms or legs . 
1446 The northern part of Babylonia was called Akhad and the southern part Sumer . 
1401 When the Sun is shining vertically over the longitude it is noon at that place . 
384 . A farmer moves along the boundary of a square field of side m in s. What will be the magnitude of displacement of the farmer at the end of minutes seconds from his initial position? 
273 After the whistle the chaser can change his direction of run and give kho to a sitting chaser . 
1029 The quantity used for energy consumption is the kilowatt-hour (kWh). kWh is the energy used if a W appliance is used for hour. 
1137 The Pharynx alimentary canal is formed of mouth aperture , buccal cavity , pharynx and intestine . 
87 You might have observed your mother boiling the milk before using or storing it. 
1486 Verify this activity by adding salt to water . 
1922 protons were created as the result of friction. 
698 Calculate the initial velocity if he was decelerated by - ms- . 
1399 Mark yes or no Table - . International Organisations The role played by international organizations like IMF , World Bank and WTO are vital for the implementation of the globalization process . 
737 Why do shop keepers usually store eatables like sweets and biscuits in glass jars? The shopkeeper wants his customers to be able to see these items! We all know that we can easily see through glass. Such materials are said to be transparent. 
153 The first proof of this association is evident from the rock paintings made by the primitive man thousands of years ago. 
1332 Epiphysis: The head of each end of a long bone consists largely of spongy bone and is covered with hyaline cartilage. 
910 So , she should create the scope of entertainment by arranging picnic , site - seeing and some sort of family amusements . 
429 In his absence Vice-President presides over the meetings . 
1965 Explain your choices in the previous question. [ marks] 
445 In this situation , the home manager can act tactfully by dint of her self - controlling power , she can proceed pleasantly and can again bring back the harmony in the family . 
1003 We find the number of moles of the given substance: 
1091 It is an effective method of prevention of soil erosion . 
1006 Four months back Mallaiah borrowed Rs. from Chandulal on condition that the paddy must be sold to him at the price fixed by him. Many small farmers borrowed money from Chandulal on similar terms. Hence they are forced to sell their produce to him at the rate fixed by him. So, instead of paying Mallaiah the amount due to him Chandulal deducted the amount borrowed along with the interest. Let us see how much Mallaiah finally got. 
272 But it is different with men . 
540 When the gives command , the first student in both the teams says Kabaddi , kabaddi and runs around Indian club or ( any other thing ) and returns running back - ward , his team-mate and sits behind . 
1453 Fig. . Soil erosion by strong wind . 
922 . Write a story about a slave of a Grihapati who travelled from his village to the city of Pataliputra with his master. AS 
1385 No more conscription No production of tanks , submarines and war planes . 
241 Each person goes to a particular place with a tray and takes food according to his choice and then eats . 
745 If a person who lived a century ago were to return to India, she would be greatly surprised at the change that has come about in the country. 
1791 Abundance of capital : In the developed countries the production of capital goods is high . 
1745 It is cheaper than other fuels and also available in the villages . 
145 Start : The action a runner performs to push his body from a stationery position to a running position in quick time is called start . 
1810 Cellulose acetate is produced by treating cellulose with acetic acid . 
202 On seeing us talking to the workers, Ravi, their employer came over to talk to us. Ravi employs only one or two men workers and several women workers for harvesting groundnut. Men workers are generally engaged to uproot groundnut plant, gather, bundle and carry the bundles to a place. Women are engaged to pluck groundnut pods from the plant. 
372 He does work . 
1609 Besides , Energy is produced form waterflow . 
380 This group of boys and girls feel the difference in taste of different in food . 
1422 ( children move towards the pond in the garden ) 
1699 When a crow bar is used to raise a heavy box , it acts as a lever . 
1462 A movement towards the earth is negative geotropism . 
606 They can be active in production when man starts taking efforts for production . 
1070 Make a list of the occasions on which a queue-system becomes necessary in the school or college . 
479 So , man cannot create any new thing . 
1153 Make a guess and discuss with your teacher. 
930 He questioned the changes that happen in nature as Why ? 
974 Again , it is only man who can save the environment . 
1064 It is obvious from the picture that due to poverty , people suffering from hunger and thirst still have hope for getting food . 
1621 Orgnise mock parliament in school , discuss in there about agricultural problems and remedies . 
296 If somebody spends two or three days there , he / she can move around the sea beach and enjoy the beauty of nature . 
627 '' If the football player had kicked the ball with a greater force , he would have scored a goal '' . 
1676 Olfactory particles that stick on to the tongue are received by the receptors in a special organ called Jacobson 's organ situated in the roof of the mouth and the smell is detected . 
564 Then he will give a piece of paper to each of the students . 
607 A person can express his personal views , give advice on different matters . 
1815 migration: a seasonal movement of animals move from one place to another and back again 
864 In this age of modern science and technology , the duties and responsibilities of a housewife have increased . 
1504 The hands of cooperation and sympathy will be extended automatically if each and every one can make such realization within herself or himself . 
1794 Some mouths of this sewer remain open upto the surface of the ground . 
572 . Which characteristic of the sound helps you to identify your friend by his voice while sitting with others in a dark room? 
1769 Cause of death Percentage in all people Percentage in men Percentage in women 
1801 3 ) Decomposer chain : The food chain that develops between the dead bodies of plants and animals , and other microbes and animals is called the decomposer chain . 
492 The child will easily be attracted to the food if the mother tastes the food herself during feeding and makes an expression showing that the food has been tasty . 
765 The income received by the common man is lower than the per capita income . 
1711 Water , gas , electricity and forests are our main national wealth . 
1684 Similarly, the metal stickers also have a magnet at the back so that they can stick to iron doors. 
1897 Max Muller translated Rigveda and other writings . 
1845 Our planet earth is just one of the planets of the solar system . 
297 Appalakonda s wife Dhanamma, wakes him up and gives him some rice gruel to eat by . am after which Appalakonda is ready to go out to the sea. 
1461 You have already learnt that people become night - blind due to deficiency of vitamin A . 
172 If he looses the job for some reason , he cannot find employment in other work . 
915 As the ball reaches the player he should raise his either thigh up to the trunk level and feet should be down word . 
1653 Electrical energy can be transmitted from one place to another with the help of wire . 
1942 On the globe , longitudes are shown as a series of semi-circles that run from pole to pole passing through the equator . 
1060 . Which department issues the pollution under control certificate? 
122 His father ' s name was Monsur Rahman and mother ' s name was Jahanara Khatun . 
1762 Now irrigation by pumping water has made it possible to cultivate lands in time . 
1997 What is the duration of the longest day in December? 
519 g. . Proximal Method ) Distal Method : In this method of giving a kho the chaser after receiving a kho keeps the front leg outside the box in the direction he has to move . 
1628 Every year we experience them one after another : summer , rainy season , autumn , late autumn , winter and spring . 
333 a) refuses to sanction a project of his ministry for sound technical reasons; 
310 In the th century, Holland emerged as a major trading power. With the rise of Holland s maritime supremacy and trade, their map makers made major breakthrough in their work. The father of Dutch cartography was Gerardus Mercator (-), who examined the previous works and did much original work on maps. Mercator s map projection is famously known Mercator Projection. Most of the world maps we use are based on his projection. 
1086 In Chapter you learnt that plants take water and mineral nutrients from the soil through the roots and transport it to the leaves. The leaves prepare food for the plant, using water and carbon dioxide during photosynthesis. You also learnt in Chapter that food is the source of energy and every cell of an organism gets energy by the breakdown of glucose. The cells use this energy to carry out vital activities of life. Therefore food must be made available to every cell of an organism. Have you ever wondered how water and nutrients absorbed by the root are transported to the leaves? How is the food prepared by the leaves carried to the parts which cannot make food? 
1402 The people revolted against the private army of the Nizam known as Razaks . 
1169 If young generation is trapped into such unhealthy habits, what will be the future of our country? What are its effects? 
980 On the advice of the Prime Minister , he appoints the other Ministers . 
528 He is one of us . 
473 Mothers use salt while cooking fish , meat or vegetables . 
684 Natural Man made Temporary Permanent Changes the state Changes the shape 
99 RESPIRATION IN MAN : The human respiratory system consists of nose , nasal cavity , trachea , bronchi and lungs . 
1067 Most newspapers have an editorial page. On that page the newspaper publishes its own opinions about current affairs. The paper also publishes the views of other writers and intellectuals and letters written by the readers. Follow any one newspaper for one month and collect editorials, articles and letters on that page that have anything to do with democracy. Classify these into the following categories: 
305 An Individual identifies himself as citizen of a particular country through his citizenship . 
1442 became the Nawab of Bengal after the battle of Plassey . 
1659 The undigested food particles are eliminated from the animal body by a process called egestion . 
730 For this reason , man is easily attacked by various types of diseases . 
334 The condition of common man during Tsarist regime 
1856 The diameter of the ball should be in such a way that it could just pass through the ring at room temperature . 
281 What worried British officials most was the political aim of the Birsa movement, for it wanted to drive out missionaries, moneylenders, Hindu landlords, and the government and set up a Munda Raj with Birsa at its head. The movement identified all these forces as the cause of the misery the Mundas were suffering. The land policies of the British were destroying their traditional land system, Hindu landlords and moneylenders were taking over their land, and missionaries were criticising their traditional culture. 
1946 The non-crystalline or amorphous forms of carbon are charcoal , coal , coke , gas carbon and lampblack . 
856 He observed , the rain water falling on the ground with a rhythm and the fully ripe grain pods tossing their heads gently in the breeze . 
508 Neil Armstrong, the first man on the Moon. 
837 Previously men were dependent more on articles available in the nature . 
1841 Similarly the hind limb is attached with the posterior girdle or the pelvic girdle . 
1203 Ribonucleic acid (RNA): is important in transferring genetic information from DNA to form proteins. It is found on ribosomes, in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus. 
1487 Do December and May belong to the same season? If not, to which seasons do they belong? 
1956 Figure . Reaction of metals with salt solutions 
1211 You are probably wondering whether India is the only democratic country in which there is inequality and where the struggle for equality continues to exist. The truth is that in many democratic countries around the world, the issue of equality continues to be the key issue around which communities struggle. So, for example, in the United States of America, the African Americans whose ancestors were the slaves who were brought over from Africa, continue to describe their lives today as largely unequal. This, despite the fact that there was a movement in the late s to push for equal rights for African Americans. Prior to this, African Americans were treated extremely unequally in the United States and denied equality through law. For example, when travelling by bus, they either had to sit at the back of the bus or get up from their seat whenever a white person wished to sit. 
1746 In case of low fever , the patient should not be covered with so many clothes . 
1728 That is why these plants are known as non - flowering plants . 
1933 One of the rays PQ falls on the mirror perpendicularly . 
1494 Loss of a lot of blood, vomiting and diarrhoea often causes a decrease in blood volume. As a result, blood cannot move normally around the body, as blood vessels are not completely full. The tissues do not get enough blood, leading to possible death of cells and hence damage to organs. 
1516 Look at figure . and make a list of all places from which evaporation takes place. 
58 Again , if he answers cotton then also he is befooled . 
809 Determine the mass of sodium hydroxide pellets he needs to use to do this. 
738 Boojho wants to know how the male gamete in the pollen grain reaches the female gamete present in the ovule. 
217 The buzzing of bees was his first music and the dance of the peacock was his first entertainment . 
618 These activities were essential to him to live on this earth , and protect himself from wild animals and enemies . 
599 You might have observed a mother sensing the temperature of her baby by gentle touch of hand . 
1452 The information , news or letter to be sent is typed by this type writer . 
1176 At the bottom, you can see some men and women bowing down and worshipping. You can also see the four lions on the gateway. What do you think they signify? 
375 Later he keeps his strong foot close to the next box and bends forward and uses his nearest hand give kho to his team mate . 
220 Affidavit: A signed document submitted to an officer, where a person makes a sworn statement regarding her personal information. 
1859 So , the volume of production will depend on the price of the product . 
327 When the raider excutes this skill his body weight should be towards the centre line . 
1249 NOTE : During the rst four counts ( - ) the leziem and body should swing from left to right and during the second four counts ( - ) . 
1895 Different types of economic systems prevail in different countries of the world . 
420 If an athelete found drugged during the competition he will not be allowed to participate in the competition . 
1548 The water stored in an overhead tank possesses energy . 
1806 The big rivers are generally originated from the hills . 
1149 How could we separate the liquids from the dissolved solid? We could evaporate them, but then they would be lost. What other option is available if we want to separate the components in a solution? Write the name of this process in block . 
695 Do you agree with the saying that man has evolved from monkey ? 
890 Fishermen 
1457 We see that the increased wind speed is accompanied by a reduced air pressure. 
238 With the development of knowledge and technology , man 's dependance on animals for economic purpose increased . 
1103 The Naval Base of the Indian Navy is situated in Karwar which is Indian Navy Emblem known as the Sea-Bird . 
753 The common man of the Third Estate bears the First and the Second Estates French Middle Class The progress of trade , industry and banking led to the rise of cities in France . 
1394 Quoted in Michael Bollig, The colonial encapsulation of the north western Namibian pastoral economy , Africa (), . 
990 The patient becomes unaware of his action or his behaviour towards others . 
98 From the very ancient periods men used to apply ointments on their faces and on special parts of the body to increase the beauty , for religious reasons , in wars , and many festivals and to protect the skin from excessive cold or heat . 
899 Further checkout who should be facing the light source to view the shadow of the other person 's shadow falling on him . 
709 Look into your friend s eye. Observe the size of the pupil. Throw light on her eye with a torch. Observe the pupil now. Switch off the torch, and observe her pupil once again. Do you notice any change in the size of the pupil? In which case was the pupil larger? Why do you think it was so? 
1751 to When organ transplantation is done , the newly grafted organ is a foreign body as far as the body is concerned . 
985 You know that man cannot survive for long without eating . 
1175 Generally it is in writing , duly stamped and signed by all the partners . 
1201 We can calculate the cost of using a single appliance by multiplying the power rating by the number of hours and the unit cost of electricity. 
1528 The mountain range , the Great Dividing Range lies roughly parallel to east coast of Australia . 
1002 . How is an iron gate prevented from rusting? 
1185 Besides being related to a number, a mole has one more advantage over a dozen or a gross. This advantage is that mass of mole of a particular substance is also fixed. 
171 On this occasion the lord used to collect several kinds of levies from him . 
1873 It gradually diminishes in size and finally disappears . 
576 In modern civilized society , men are accustomed to enjoy life collectively . 
1941 The four states of matter are solid , liquid , gas and plasma state . 
1906 The World of Plants food haBITS Obese We know about the cartoon hero Popeye , do n't we ? 
571 Chapter I is on the French Revolution. Today we often take the ideas of liberty, freedom and equality for granted. But we need to remind ourselves that these ideas also have a history. By looking at the French Revolution you will read a small part of that history. The French Revolution led to the end of monarchy in France. A society based on privileges gave way to a new system of governance. The Declaration of the Rights of Man during the revolution, announced the coming of a new time. The idea that all individuals had rights and could claim equality became part of a new language of politics. These notions of equality and freedom emerged as the central ideas of a new age; but in different countries they were reinterpreted and rethought in many different ways. The anti-colonial movements in India and China, Africa and South America, produced ideas that were innovative and original, but they spoke in a language that gained currency only from the late eighteenth century. 
20 However , man has for the most part used technology for the good of man . 
250 In earlier days Marma men used to wear handloom - woven clothes named doah . 
1827 Please give me a saw to cut the wood . 
884 However, in recent years the rise of coalition politics has imposed certain constraints on the power of the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister of a coalition government cannot take decisions as he likes. He has to accommodate different groups and factions in his party as well as among alliance partners. He also has to heed to the views and positions of the coalition partners and other parties, on whose support the survival of the government depends. 
1851 In cities , transport department gives training to school students on traf c rules . 
175 It was believed that sweat - soaked warm clothing of men and some wheat , if kept together in a box for few days , rats would be produced . 
1273 They were also used for cooking rice , wheat and other grains and cereals . 
189 It is her duty to look after the tasks to be done . 
1104 Uncle ! can you tell me how paddy is cultivated ? 
431 There are two types in baton exchange method : - ) Visual method : - The outgoing runner keeps his eyes on the incoming runner and collects the baton from his hand . 
1865 Do you think that the government official s actions were right? Should his son be exempt from the law just because his father is economically and politically powerful? 
1721 Where do you think maximum evaporation would take place from plants, rivers, oceans or soils? 
254 Man can do mistake but a computer does not ; So to finish a work rapidly and accurately we use computer . 
1468 The cell and its components can be observed clearly with the help of an electron microscope . 
1221 This type of behaviour is called accepted behaviour . 
682 Men are not born with these misconceptions . 
329 The player should maintain his body balance when using this method . 
667 Depending on mother ' s convenience , it is better to bathe the child during the morning hours of the day . 
1 Besides these forests naturally developed forests , there are man made forests too , which are developed artificially over a vast area of land . 
262 According to him , material culture is created by human beings by converting natural resources into man made structures like House , building , bridge , road , dam , machines , production centres , industries , computer , technology and others . 
1073 In a closed electric circuit, the electric current passes from one terminal of the electric cell to the other terminal. 
1808 A mirror is placed on the line and a ray shone to strike the mirror at the normal line. Use a pencil to mark the incident light ray. 
1173 (c) copper is a better conductor of heat than the stainless steel. 
124 OUT SIDE THE GROUND : - When a dodger loses contact of both his feet and touches the area outside the ground it is said to be outside the ground . 
718 When the father dies , the land is distributed among his children , thus the per capita land is gradually decreasing . 
235 To implement the skill , the raider should have quick leg movements and should posses the ability to stretch out his hand and withdraw it as rapidly as possible . 
970 Everyday from dawn to dusk man 's life is influenced by animals . 
1371 As the water flows down the outlet from the dam, describe the transfer of energy. 
1186 Potato Ginger Fig. . b ) Vegetative reproduction : In plants like rose and sugarcane the stem cuttings are used for propagation of the plants . 
1704 Add the vegetable peels , old bread , and leaves . 
1017 Conductors allow charge to move through them easily. 
183 Position of hands should be adjusted according to the convenience , his will and the shot coming towards him . 
1932 In the previous sections, you have read about different markets from where we buy goods. From where do you think shop-owners procure their goods? Goods are produced in factories, on farms and in homes. However, we don t buy directly from the factory or from the farm. Nor would the producers be interested in selling us small quantities such as one kilo of vegetables or one plastic mug. 
549 The old merchant elite of Calcutta patronised public forms of entertainment such as kabirlarai (poetry contests), musical soirees and dance performances. In contrast, the new bhadralok found himself at home in the more private world of reading novels. 
1838 carbon dioxide diffuses out of the blood and into the cells of the alveolus, then into the air 
1251 Analyse the question to determine what is being asked 
1546 During the period of the Shatavahanas , the Kannada land was prosperous and had able adventurous administrators . 
292 b ) Synthetic fibre : Man has made synthetic fibres by using coal , water and air . 
943 Women are distressed a lot as they have to do not only weaving but also the household chores like cooking food, fetching water,preparing children to go to school etc. 
711 Ramesh can complete his work of lifting water from a well . But Rasheeda can not move the wall in spite of several attempts . 
82 The owner of the land himself takes part in this type of agriculture . 
1901 When blood calcium level increases , how is it reduced ? 
1899 The hydrosphere has a number of important functions. Water is a part of all living cells, it provides a habitat for many living organisms, it helps to regulate climate and it is used by humans for domestic, industrial and other use. 
1644 Olypic Motto Faster , Higher , Stronger LESSON - LONG JUMP The following components will be learnt in this lesson : Dimension of the landing pit . 
1416 Gold , jute , cotton , cloth etc have high demand , so they have an expanded market . 
611 Toads eat them to benefit men . 
404 Most of the time as it watches the trouble its mother is taking ; it gets rid of the bed - wetting habit . 
1904 Firstly , open the lid and pour a little water into the can . 
474 International Date Line : From any fixed place if any body crosses the 180 longitude he will observe that it creates problems to determine the day of the week along with the differences of local time . 
507 His father was Syed Raisuddin and his mother Nurunnessa Mullik . 
1753 Receiving stimulus from the environment , the nerve tissue transmits it within the body and accordingly appropriate responses are created . 
352 Freedom of consumers : Every consumer can freely consume any goods according to his ability , desire and choice . 
892 Bill Nye the science guy talks about the food web: 
728 Though the landowner doesn t treat her well, she continues to work for him since she can get loans from him when in need. Rama tells us that the only source of credit for the landless people in Sonpur are the landowner-employers. 
1544 Most of the continent is covered with grasslands , shrubs and open woodlands . 
132 He will discharge the functions of the President during the absence of the President . 
1445 The boiling point of water is F and the distance between the two is divided into equal parts . 
121 Whether increase in corporate tax or sales tax affects the living condition of common man ? 
1509 Like other living organisms, plants also respire for their survival as you have learnt in Class VI. They also take in oxygen from the air and give out carbon dioxide. In the cells oxygen is used to break down glucose into carbon dioxide and water as in other organisms. In plants each part can independently take in oxygen from the air and give out carbon dioxide. You have already learnt in Chapter that the leaves of the plants have tiny pores called stomata for exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide. 
1739 The second stage of capital formation is the need for mobilizing the personal money savings in order to supply them for investment . 
1949 Where is the maximum poverty among Indian states according to the census of ? 
1871 Knitting is the process of making fabric by using knitting needles to form interlocking loops and rings of woolen yarn. 
1656 The essence of this relationship between plants and hormones is applied in using many hormones as herbicides . 
1870 Can you imagine a world in which we cannot run motors or trains? 
116 Women are more active in goat rearing . 
1948 Lift a book through a height. To do this you must apply a force. The book rises up. There is a force applied on the book and the book has moved. Hence, work is done. 
1475 In these circumstances , the farmers can be saved from the exploitation of the middlemen and helped for getting fair price of their crops through forming sale committees . 
269 So , in economics , economic activities mean those activities related to money earning and money spending which men do in their day to day life . 
538 Man satisfies his wants by buying goods and services . 
1577 a solution of an acid (e.g. ) and a solution of a base (e.g. ) 
1353 There is only one cell in the body of the animals of the phylum Protozoa . 
205 Land is an essential part of man 's life . 
582 The class captain maintains contact with the class teacher and the headmaster for different purposes . 
650 The defender should be in contact with the raider , till he goes out of the court . 
1235 The moon is a satellite of the earth . 
736 Fig. . : Fire Brigade men ghting re Know this : Now a days pocket re extinguishers of BC type are available . 
1282 The thinner the wire is , the hotter it is . 
1718 The continent is fortunate in having a vast level , fertile and well irrigated land . 
1388 The West Pakistanis were favoured more in education , in jobs , in trade and commerce etc . 
963 The producers and business men ( firms ) produce and exchange goods according to their desire for profit . 
1612 (b) our distance from the moon keeps changing. 
977 The housewife should also be able to create diversity in normal routine work . 
1637 Portable generators produce exhaust fumes which contain poisonous gases that can kill if in high enough levels. When using a portable generator, make sure it is in a well-ventilated area, and away from water as much as possible. 
1306 10th line : Knit 10 chains and join it in each hole with a half long . 
1749 World famous temples are there in Pattadakallu , Badami and Aihole . 
1245 This is a graphical representation of s = ut From this graph we can nd out the distance at which the body is present from its starting point . 
1317 This shows that copper is a good conductor of heat . 
1074 In such case one can loan from banks and counseling from the government livestock department . 
1444 If you thread a rope through a pulley , you can pull down instead of up . 
663 Fig. . the minimum temperature at For thousands of years man has been using water to extinguish fire . 
935 All life on earth is interdependent and man is only a strand in this delicate web of relationships . 
978 If the buyer can understand that the seller has demanded high price , he should try to convince him . 
764 So , the economic activities of man are of two types : Money earning related activities and ( B ) money spending related activities . 
1197 If green light passes through a transparent object, the emerging light is green; similarly if red light passes through a transparent object, the emerging light is red. 
654 Besides, important men probably had a sayin local administration. These included the nagara-shreshthior chiefbanker or merchant of the city, the sarthavaha or leaderof the merchant caravans, the prathama-kulikaor the chiefcraftsman, and the head of the kayasthasor scribes. 
804 Although contact with opponents is allowed in handball but one can not make use of his hands and legs . 
301 Man is unisexual . 
1436 It has two parts : ) The Crest The motto At the crest , four lions stand majestically back to back . 
433 He is the person solely invests capital to run the business . 
1649 . Which organelle is known as the powerhouse of the cell? Why? 
1817 What did it mean to be nawabs? It meant of course that the Company acquired more power and authority. But it also meant something else. Each company servant began to have visions of living like nawabs. 
608 Since the very beginning of civilization , it has been found that each and every human being has been engaged in making a home of his own . 
1365 Shab - e - Qadr is one of the festivals of Muslims . 
1585 Fill in the requirements of photosynthesis in the block on the left and fill in what type of energy is needed and the name of the pigment that absorbs the energy. 
1250 Sources : The one who constructs history is an historian . 
1279 In the court of Murshidabad we see a different trend. Here, after defeating Sirajuddaulah the British had successfully installed their puppet Nawabs on the throne, first Mir Zafar and then Mir Qasim. The court at Murshidabad encouraged local miniature artists to absorb the tastes and artistic styles of the British. You can see this in Fig. . This is a picture of an Id procession painted by a court painter in the late eighteenth century. Notice how local miniature artists at Murshidabad began adopting elements of European realism. They use perspective, which creates a sense of distance between objects that are near and those at a distance. They use light and shade to make the figures look life like and real. 
1672 You have a tractor in front of your house and we thought of discussing with you, we said. 
883 People began to gather and discuss these issues in their village councils, in bazaars and at festivals or wherever the headmen and priests of several villages were assembled. The initiative was taken by the Dhurwas of the Kanger forest, where reservation first took place. Although there was no single leader, many people speak of Gunda Dhur, from village Nethanar, as an important figure in the movement. In , mango boughs, a lump of earth, chillies and arrows, began circulating between villages. These were actually messages inviting villagers to rebel against the British. Every village contributed something to the rebellion expenses. Bazaars were looted, the houses of officials and traders, schools and police stations were burnt and robbed, and grain redistributed. Most of those who were attacked were in some way associated with the colonial state and its oppressive laws. William Ward, a missionary who observed the events, wrote: From all directions came streaming into Jagdalpur, police, merchants, forest peons, schoolmasters and immigrants. 
948 It is this tendency that makes a person eager to establish relation with neighbours , taking him or her across the frontiers or premises of his or her own family . 
351 A housewife is also responsible to ensure good health and mental peace of the family members . 
1768 Due to this reason the herbivores get suf cient food . 
1629 What happens when you combine baking soda and vinegar ? 
1077 E.g. Tallness Dwarfness - TT - tt Red flower White flower - RR - rrOne factor in each pair is received from the mother and the other from the father . 
1800 Memorial of Salt Satyagraha - Payyannur of the rights and consciousness of freedom grew simultaneously as a result of this . 
1285 After the death of his father Bindhusara , it is said that , Ashoka had to kill all his brothers to assume the throne , as per Buddhist traditions . 
1879 Solids could be soft or hard and could break . 
1448 For example , we get rice from the paddy plant . 
184 Accidents usually take place due to an individual fault , his carelessness or due to a haste . 
574 The peasant movement demanded reduction of revenue, abolition of begar, and social boycott of oppressive landlords. In many places nai dhobi bandhs were organised by panchayats to deprive landlords of the services of even barbers and washermen. In June , Jawaharlal Nehru began going around the villages in Awadh, talking to the villagers, and trying to understand their grievances. By October, the Oudh Kisan Sabha was set up headed by Jawaharlal Nehru, Baba Ramchandra and a few others. Within a month, over branches had been set up in the villages around the region. So when the Non-Cooperation Movement began the following year, the effort of the Congress was to integrate the Awadh peasant struggle into the wider struggle. 
1183 Have you ever thought about the elements found in our body ? 
1136 This Parliament put Charles I to trial and executed him . 
1607 Besides , the child starts playing around as it grows . 
971 In each of these states, resources were obtained from the producers that is, peasants, cattle-keepers, artisans who were often persuaded or compelled to surrender part of what they produced. Sometimes these were claimed as rent due to a lord who asserted that he owned the land. Revenue was also collected from traders. 
543 In , the Chinese Emperor sent Lin Ze-xu to Canton as a Special Commissioner with instructions to stop the opium trade. After he arrived in Canton in the spring of , Lin arrested , men involved in the trade, and confiscated , pounds of opium. Then he forced the foreign factories to hand over their stocks of opium, burnt , crates of opium and blew the ashes to the wind. When he announced that Canton was closed to foreign trade, Britain declared war. Defeated in the Opium War (-) , the Chinese were forced to accept the humiliating terms of the subsequent treaties, legalizing opium trade and opening up China to foreign merchants. 
645 Ahom society was divided into clans or khels. There were very few castes of artisans, so artisans in the Ahom areas came from the adjoining kingdoms. A khel often controlled several villages. The peasant was given land by his village community. Even the king could not take it away without the community s consent. 
1213 But we do not like to eat when our appetite becomes satisfied . 
261 His palm and feet are to be rubbed so as to produce heat . 
1330 . Rani said conservation of biodiversity starts from our home. Is she correct? How do you support her? What will be your action for this? ( AS ) 
1248 According to Nurkse , A country is poor because it is poor . 
822 Pariksha-Guru reflects the inner and outer world of the newly emerging middle classes. The characters in the novel are caught in the difficulty of adapting to colonised society and at the same time preserving their own cultural identity. The world of colonial modernity seems to be both frightening and irresistible to the characters. The novel tries to teach the reader the right way to live and expects all sensible men to be worldly-wise and practical, to remain rooted in the values of their own tradition and culture, and to live with dignity and honour. 
1860 Usually two to three generations live together in small settlements or villages. Most families are related to one another and groups of such families form a tribe. Members of a tribe follow occupations such as hunting, gathering, farming, herding and fishing. Usually, women do most of the agricultural work, including preparing the ground, sowing seeds, looking after the growing plants and harvesting grain. Children often look after plants, driving away animals and birds that might eat them. Women also thresh, husk, and grind grain. Men usually lead large herds of animals in search of pasture. Children often look after small flocks. The cleaning of animals and milking, is done by both men and women. Both women and men make pots, baskets, tools and huts. They also take part in singing, dancing and decorating their huts. 
1960 Anterior lobe of the Pituitary : Produces stimulating hormones under the stimulus of releasing hormones hormone secreting cells capillary network Nerve fibres Transports vasopressin and oxytocin . 
674 Naturally he will first select the more important wants and try to satisfy them with the limited resources . 
1732 Due to the overgrazing by animals like cattle , goat and sheep the green mantle over the top soil is lost . 
493 Gases can be compressed, because their particles can be forced closer together. Look at the photo of a scuba diver underwater. Do you see the tank on his back? He uses this tank to breathe underwater. A scuba diver can stay underwater for almost an hour. How do you think he can get enough air to breathe for a whole hour from a small tank like that? Discuss this with your class. 
224 No man is a saint who is not pure in heart. 
1695 Explain the behaviour of the electrons in the circuit based on the ammeter readings. 
775 He or she also suffers from jaundice and headache . 
777 it ought to be such an unselfish game. It merges the individual in the eleven; he doesn t play that he may win, but that his side may. That s very true, said Tom, and that s why football and cricket, now one comes to think of it, are such much better games than fives or hare-and-hounds, or any others where the object is to come in first or to win for oneself, and not that one s side may win. And then the Captain of the eleven! said the master, what a post is his in our School-world!...requiring skill and gentleness and firmness, and I know not what other rare qualities. Extract from Tom Brown s Schooldays by Thomas Hughes 
141 . In what way is the class monitor misusing his power? 
1253 As a result day and night occur . 
1398 If cow - dung , leaves , straw etc are mixed with water and kept in absence of air , fermentation occurs with the help of a kind of bacteria . 
898 Then men started wearing tree barks to cover their modesty . 
512 This experience may help him to go for new invention . 
3 All free gifts of nature and all things which man cannot produce , are included in land . 
400 Dogs and cats were his first playmates . 
598 Therefore , sound health of a person is his important capital and an investment for its development is to transforming him into valuable resource . 
1020 Judge : A judge passes judgment in courts . 
44 A patient receiving dialysis to filter his blood because the kidneys are not working as they should. 
1085 An elephant trumpets at Hz. Assuming the speed of sound in air is , calculate the wavelength of this infrasonic sound wave made by the elephant. 
1554 What changes occurred with the introduction of iron during the Iron Age ? 
803 Many conscious mothers put a piece of soft cloth after folding it under the head of the baby and change every now and then as per requirement . 
1009 In this reaction manganese dioxide acts as a catalyst . 
1741 Over the nineteenth century, missionary schools were set up all over India. After , however, the British government in India was reluctant to directly support missionary education. There was a feeling that any strong attack on local customs, practices, beliefs and religious ideas might enrage native opinion. 
1482 The substances that turn blue litmus to red are acidic in nature. The substances that are soapy to touch and turn red litmus to blue are basic in nature. 
723 He is the Leader of the Lok Sabha . 
1241 (e) A cold steel spoon is dipped in a cup of hot milk. It transfers heat to its other end by the process of . 
182 The responsibility of an individual to his country is known as the ' duty ' . 
313 Education and medical care of the children lie on both father and mother . 
1297 A biofuel is any fuel which is produced from plant or animal waste. Methane can be produced by decomposing plants and animal waste. This is useful for farms as they can produce enough methane gas to help run their farms. The most common biofuels are made from maize, sugarcane and sorghum. The biofuels that are made can be used in vehicles or heating and cooling systems. 
539 But we should remember that the President exercises all these powers only on the advice of the Council of Ministers. The President can ask the Council of Ministers to reconsider its advice. But if the same advice is given again, she is bound to act according to it. Similarly, a bill passed by the Parliament becomes a law only after the President gives assent to it. If the President wants, she can delay this for some time and send the bill back to the Parliament for reconsideration. But if the Parliament passes the bill again, she has to sign it. 
45 Microorganisms Earth provides enough to satisfy everyman 's need , but not every man 's greed . 
119 Mothers will first ascertain whether the taste of the food is alright or not . 
221 The digestive power of patient becomes weak when he / she is attacked by the disease . 
1355 Functions of these cells are storage and conduction of food materials . 
1641 The seeds of Balsam are dispersed in this manner. You may have also noticed that some fruits explode when we sprinkle water on them and the seeds get dispersed. 
201 He then places the other leg close to the sitting box of his teammate and bend forward and gives kho using the nearest hand . 
8 There can be no question of the superior profit to the farmer of enclosures rather than open fields. In one case he is in chains; he can make no changes in soil or prices, he is like a horse in team, he must jog along with the rest. 
138 One who told Do , he will go one step backward and all stand in attention position . 
814 . Take a metal or wooden strip. Strike it at one end and ask your friend to hear the sound by keeping his ears at the other end of the strip. Ask your friend what difference he noticed while hearing the sounds when his ears are away from the strip and touching the strip (fig-). 
687 leader. He settled disputes, organised food supplies, or arranged informal credit. He also brought important information on 
580 If the mother starts feeding the child with an expression of distaste at the sight of the food , the child will not be interested in taking that food . 
849 If the athlete is found guilty after the competition in such cases , the medals and prizes will be withdrawn from the athlete and he will be imposed ban for a several years or for life time . 
1004 Someday , erosion will cause the arches to collapse , but until that time , we can enjoy their spectacular beauty . 
2000 This game was used effectively in sports education . 
587 The head of the family and the male family members usually perform the outside activities . 
1226 The retina is covered by a large number of nerve fibres ( optic fibres ) which sensitive to light . 
77 What is the difference between the climber's potential energy when she is at the top of the slope compared to when she reaches the bottom? 
1891 Due to acid rain several species may die or may become extinct . 
1287 Southwestern Asia has the largest petroleum reserves which are located in Saudi Arabia , Iraq , Kuwait , Iran , Bahrain , Qatar and United Arab Emirates ( UAE ) . 
635 ( b ) Combination raiding : - Raider starts the cant from his court and plays according to his comfort . 
35 But with the change of time and progress of civilization , the economic condition of man changes . 
277 The earth having a full rotation on her axis for 24 hours , simultaneously moves around the sun on a set route i . e . orbit once in a year . 
1595 Carcinogens can cause a DNA mutation that occurs in one of several genes that normally function to control growth. E.g the BRCA, or "Breast Cancer Gene". The BRCA gene normally functions to suppress tumour formation; but if a genetic mutation occurs it does not work properly, and tumour formation can begin. Mutations in this gene does not mean that a person will develop breast cancer, but they have an increased risk for breast cancer. 
605 Do you think that she will reach this velocity? Why/Why not? 
46 In order to do this , the second student raises his right hand to take one arm distance from the right marker and the third student takes one arm distance from second student . 
997 He does research about how to breed new seeds of crops . 
1429 The earth wire usually does nothing. The only time it is used is when something goes wrong inside the machine. If the live wire is exposed and touches the metal casing of the washing machine, you could get an electric shock if you then touch the metal casing. However, the earth wire is connected to the metal casing so that the current goes through the earth wire and into the ground instead of shocking you. The earth wire has a very low resistance and so a strong current will easily go through it. 
1744 You will learn about tsunami , avalanche , landside , like natural calamities in higher classes . 
1128 In each of the photos, the populations of animals are found in a specific area. Do you think the zebra in Kruger National Park and the zebra in Hluhluwe-Umfolozi game reserve in Zululand are from the same population? Why do you say so? 
354 To ensure all these , a housewife should take concrete decision to make a balance between the demands and resources of the family . 
137 By Termination : Any citizen of India in the event of securing the citizenship of another country , his citizenship of India will be cancelled legally without expecting his application form for registration . 
933 Management of the Firm : After the establishment of the firm , the organizer performs the essential organizational functions such as he coordinates the work of different sections , appoints the workers to the suitable places according to their fitness , ensures the operation of machines etc . 
237 From ancient time men have known that there are mines under the deep earth ' s crust . 
1379 Fishing , rolling beedies , processing of cashewnuts and agriculture are the major occupations of people . 
724 Ask your friend B, who is in front of you to move a feet aside from his place. What happens? Did you see his image in the mirror? If not, why? 
1805 Over the last two hundred years workers all over the world have fought to get these rights recognized, even though they may not be implemented in all places. In most countries the governments have agreed that these are basic needs of workers and made laws that ensure workers these rights. 
1887 If you had to choose between a DAV school, Gurukul School and a government run school, which one would you prefer to go to and why? 
1464 Soft wood is used in making paper , pulp , cardboard and news print . 
901 b) a woman soldier. 
435 It means only one female is literate in comparison to two males . 
52 So women have to wait long to fetch water or they walk upto km to collect fresh water. 
1439 Rs , from the trader at a very high interest rate to buy seeds, fertilisers, pesticides for cultivation. At that time, the local trader made Swapna agree to another condition. He made her promise to sell all her cotton to him. 
1658 Atoms are extremely small in size and are expressed in terms of - m ( A ) . 
852 There was no fixed place for him . 
39 Therefore men are searching for new sources of energy . 
1688 diatomic: a diatomic molecule consists of two atoms; H, N, O, F, Cl, Br, and I are all examples of elements that consist of diatomic molecules 
1042 Following branches come out from dorsal aorta : Coeliaco - mesenteric artery : From very near to the origin of the dorsal aorta , a branched artery comes out and after proceeding to some distance it becomes divided into two portions . 
253 He goes there for water but does not get any . 
348 Man cannot live without water . 
466 He should try to reach the foot of the defender . 
358 Where does she have the most kinetic energy? [ mark] 
1971 At the free end of each renal tubule there is a closed cup - like part called the Bowman ' s capsule . 
24 Men build big palatial buildings for living ; they use radio , TV , computer , VCR etc . in increasing number . 
391 If the chaser in the th box gives a kho to the chaser in the th box , the dodger runs towards the pole and stabilizes himself . 
776 Ask the student who represents the earth to spin himself and revolve around the chair along the elliptical path . 
364 In all , under such circumstance , the mother has to be patient and spend more time for the child and remain close to it . 
1233 ( ) Control the body and always lean slightly towards the centre line . 
616 Large cattle farms called ranches are looked after by sturdy men called cowboys (Fig. .). 
1124 Write about the post of ce that you have visited . 
346 If all these are done , we can rightly say that a home manager has been performing her social responsibilities well . 
888 Make a list of the birthdays of great men of the nation and learn about them . 
984 He must realise the differences among the families and he must respect it to get along with others . 
495 Men from many areas wear shirt and dhuti - punjabi . 
1707 To get a comprehensive idea of the aquatic ecology , the study of a pond is appropriate . 
1982 Drawing a graph of the temperature gradient in the troposphere 
37 Have you observed your mother any time in the kitchen keeping cut potatoes or brinjals in cold water? 
1327 The paintings of Ajanta rock cut caves are world famous . 
1540 Now let us compare the onion and the cheek cells. 
110 There is a reward for every work done by a man . 
386 d Any citizen can approach the courts if her rights are violated 
23 Iodine can exist as one of three oxides (; ; ). A chemist has produced one of these oxides and wishes to know which one they have. If he started with of iodine and formed of the oxide, which oxide has he produced? 
1842 Conductors can be made of different materials. Do different materials have different resistances? 
1582 The pictures of persons doing different occupations are given here . 
32 We ought to take pledge for extension of education for both male and female . 
692 But if one uses her creativity a little bit , one can prepare doormats . 
299 He sacrificed everything for the freedom of his motherland . 
640 Again , he spends his earned money to buy essential goods to satisfy his wants by the consumption of those goods . 
257 Men can travel from one place to another easily . 
1435 Fig. . Night Sky You might have noticed moon and hundreds of twinkling stars in the night sky . 
748 These are some extracts from the last speech of Salvador Allende (pronounced Ayen-they). He was then the President of Chile, a country in South America. The speech was given on the morning of September , the day his government was overthrown by the military. Allende was the founder leader of the Socialist Party of Chile and led the Popular Unity coalition to victory in the presidential election in . After being elected the President, Allende had taken several policy decisions to help the poor and the workers. These included reform of the educational system, free milk for children and redistribution of land to the landless farmers. He was opposed to foreign companies taking away natural resources like copper from the country. The landlords, the rich and the Church opposed his policies. Some other political parties in Chile also opposed his government. 
1853 Again , there are machines which work to increase motion and distance . 
896 Compare the difference seen in male and female human beings and animals. 
1079 Prepare a note on KSFE in your region after visiting it . 
1178 The government of India banned Salman Rushdie s book Satanic Verses on the ground that it was disrespectful to Prophet Mohammed and was likely to hurt the feelings of Muslim community. 
1701 Often after rains we find umbrella like structures growing from the ground. Such plants are called saprophytes. They grow on dead/decaying matter. 
403 c) calls up the police station asking them not to register a complaint that is likely to be filed against his relative. 
1410 On the other hand , the environment will also remain clean . 
26 The account holder can close his account if he wishes . 
1093 . What happens when two animals having similar habits share one ecosystem? AS ) 
1566 Hydrostatic - Allows animal to be very flexible moves easily; not restricted in terms of possible movements. 
617 Sense of smell in a dog The sense of smell in a dog is one lakh times greater than that of man . 
1223 How did these changes affect the life of weavers and other artisans? 
1158 By such process now telephonic conversation and television programme are taking place . 
956 Peasants, artisans, workers and new businessmen enjoyed a new-found freedom. 
1561 ) ) ) ) A pair of kidneys is situated on either side of the backbone . 
434 The seller gets money from the buyer when he sells the commodity . 
553 c. Children in your class refuse to share their food with a particular person because they think she is dirty. 
1143 Harvesting is the cutting of the mature crop manually or by machines. 
9 According to Nimcock , a social scientist , on the whole a family is an organisation formed by husband and wife . 
1055 Can you identify the pressure groups functioning in the news clippings given here? What demand are they making? 
498 His smile and words become attractive to others . 
836 Prime Minister is the head of the government and actually exercises all governmental powers. He takes most of the decisions in the Cabinet meetings. 
318 As an exercise for military men this bold and graceful sport is likely to give increased dexterity in the use of the lance or sabre, or other cavalry weapons, as well as a firmer seat in the saddle, and a faculty of quickly turning to the right hand or to the left, which must be effective in the melee of battle. 
1015 Trunk : The middle part consisting of the vertebral column , and the ribs and their cartilage ' the thorax . 
417 Eventfully he rolls on his shoulders and hip region . 
1301 So that it now permeates every aspect of modern society . 
1023 It's a special day today! Everyone's rushing to get to the Gram Sabha! Do you know why? Because the Gram Sabha is holding its first meeting after the election of the new Gram Panchayat. 
407 She should wear bright and dark colours . 
1991 -I've heard about the Municipal Corporation. They've put up signs around the city to inform people about malaria,- said Mala. 
590 Informal training means the training that an employee gains while doing his duty . 
199 It saves money and at the same time delights her leisure hours . 
1623 Glycolipids Carbohydrate chains attached to phospholipids on the outside surface of the membrane. Act as recognition sites for specific chemicals and are important in cell-to-cell attachment to form tissues. 
729 So there would be no man and animal to live on earth . 
1160 Discuss it and note the inferences in the Science diary . 
190 b) threatens to send his security staff to rough up his neighbour; 
108 Towards Man Hope you have understood that complex organisms are formed from simpler organisms . 
999 Towards her eastern and western sides the earth does not have any specific boundary which can be taken as the end or border . 
88 Well ahead of the festival , people clean their houses and throughout Pongal Rangoli days , women decorate their houses with colourful . 
1219 Use the Table for your friends and work out how tall they are likely to be. Find out who is likely to be the tallest and who might be the shortest in your class. 
886 This mentality makes man aloof . 
448 Women were fond of the games like kari , guti , kanamachi and bagbandhi . 
1652 The major water bodies of the world are the Pacific ocean , the Atlantic ocean , the Indian ocean and the Arctic ocean . 
1821 When it rains the water level in the bottle rises. Measure the height of water with the help of a scale and you will get the rainfall in Centimetres for your area during the period you had kept the in the open. 
1227 This view is known as the Panspermia concept . 
426 Anyone who has not submitted his accounts, and those of his relatives, cannot contest the elections. 
244 His father was Karama Chanda Gandhi , mother was Puthalibai . 
633 He must possess all the qualifications necessary to become a Member of Lok Sabha . 
1165 The painting by Raju is the outcome of such an experience . 
441 Though a husband and a wife have the closest relation , sometimes they contradict each other . 
1935 A concave lens in front of the rays of light. 
1451 Solid form of Corbondioxide is called Dry Ice. 
1964 The peace and stability of the country are affected . 
1118 Mead, Margaret. , . (edition) Growing Up In Samoa. 
1840 What were the causes for Battle of Plassey ? 
786 ( see picture- ) Crouch : The participant standing in ' T ' shape should bend his body close to left palm and right knee , folding left leg , bend right leg slightly forward . 
1947 The Sun's energy is captured and used by plants to produce carbohydrates, which the plant uses and stores. Plants form the basis of food chains. 
699 The fusion of male and female gametes is called fertilisation. 
422 ) Pole turn using distal method : In this method the chaser sitting in the box next to the pole as soon as he gets a kho opposite leg towards the pole and he jumps from that foot and grips the pole with both the hands and places the other foot behind the pole in the free zone and turns in the other direction . 
931 Interestingly , even if a person does not know how to swim , he would not drown in this sea . 
176 c ) Escaping when the chaser rushes to the pole : In this skill the dodger pushes the pole strongly and changes direction in order to escape from the chaser rushing towards him . 
1232 Invention of wheel made their transport easier . 
525 Meet a doctor of your locality and ask him about the different types of diseases, caused by different micro organisms. Note them down and discuss with your friends. 
102 Types of pole dive : - a. Pole dive after taking two steps ( Distal Method ) : - The active chaser who takes kho in the eighth square , for pole dive takes the leg opposite to the direction of travel , placed first towards the pole , the second step is taken in the free zone , simultaneously the chaser takes support of the pole with right thigh and hooking the elbow of left hand around the pole and leans across the centre line , simultaneously he swings the free arm parallel to the ground . 
1921 Some are fixed to our ribs and make the ribcage move in and out . 
1368 Saturn : It is the sixth planet from the Sun and the second largest planet in the solar system after Jupiter . 
1089 e c n a t s D i e c n a t s D i e c n a t s D i e c n a t s D i Time ( a ) Time ( b ) Time ( c ) Time ( d ) ( a ) and ( d ) represent variable speed . 
1992 Mulberry , soyabean , cotton , tobacco , flax and jinseng are produced as cash crops . 
470 In our daily lives , when accidents take place , before the injured person can reach the doctor , he should be given immediate relief . 
1532 aCtivity . i do I observe the pictures given below and fill up the blanks using the right words , based on the sounds produced . 
246 Her responsibility does not end only by distributing the work . 
1781 Take a wide plastic bottle. Remove the bottom. Get a Y-shaped glass or plastic tube. Make a hole in the lid so that the tube may pass through it. To the forked end of the tube fix two deflated balloons. Introduce the tube into the bottle as shown in Fig. .. Now cap the bottle. Seal it to make it airtight. To the open base of the bottle tie a thin rubber or plastic sheet using a large rubber band. 
1352 The Chinese tradition of writing began with pictures and got transformed into an ideographic script . 
1179 A solution which contains comparatively less quantity of solute is called a dilute solution . 
863 stamp post cover parcel speed post Write a letter to your friend inviting him to attend your village fair . 
353 Ask one of your friends to hold a mirror in his hand. 
115 Let us observe how your mother cooks, you also can observe how a cycle mechanic repairs a cycle, try to observe how farmer ploughs his field. 
38 For example, nerve cell in both in man and elephant are long and branched. 
1925 Groups of living things and their environment make up an ecosystem. 
872 The peasants had to but obey whatever the lord and his manager commanded . 
1123 Water pollution is caused by organic and inorganic industrial wastes and affluents discharged into rivers. The main culprits in this regard are paper, pulp, chemical, textile and dyeing, petroleum refineries, tanneries and electroplating industries that let out dyes, detergents, acids, salts and heavy metals like lead and mercury pesticides, fertilisers, synthetic chemicals with carbon, plastics and rubber, etc. into the water bodies. Fly ash, phospo- gypsum and iron and steel slags are the major solid wastes in India. 
42 They dreamt of a society where each one did his work according to his ability and the fruits of his labour consumed collectively by all through cooperative societies . 
428 We need to give more power to the panchayats to realise the dream of Mahatma Gandhi and the hopes of the makers of our Constitution. Panchayati Raj establishes true democracy. It restores power to the only place where power belongs in a democracy in the hands of the people. Giving power to Panchayats is also a way to reduce corruption and increase administrative efficiency. When people participate in the planning and implementation of developmental schemes, they would naturally exercise greater control over these schemes. This would eliminate the corrupt middlemen. Thus, Panchayati Raj will strengthen the foundations of our democracy. 
1366 Antarctica is bound by the Indian Ocean in the east , Pacific Ocean in the west and Atlantic Ocean in the northwest . 
418 . The law should be the expression of the general will; all female and male citizens should have a say either personally or by their representatives in its formulation; it should be the same for all. All female and male citizens are equally entitled to all honours and public employment according to their abilities and without any other distinction than that of their talents. 
412 Mehtakalu ( Kaaluchanda ) and Thruptha were his parents . 
630 He can see himself in the mirror and can learn from others about his / her physical appearance - how he looks like ? 
1266 Husk or bran water is also used or a cleansing material . 
1915 (a) the batsman did not hit the ball hard enough. 
1831 The govt . of the country has taken various steps to make the population human resources development . 
679 If he answers iron , he is befooled . 
950 It was this search that led man to the concept of vaccine . 
1361 Additional calcium in the diet is required during pregnancy and lactation . 
72 Businessmen and small-scale producers of goods, in particular, began to realise that uniform laws, standardised weights and measures, and a common national currency would facilitate the movement and exchange of goods and capital from one region to another. 
427 Man ' s voice can reach up to a limited distance . 
1031 This means that the political system of tribes continued even during the time of Atharva Veda . 
1438 You have learnt earlier that the cell membrane gives shape to the cell. In addition to the cell membrane, there is an outer thick layer in cells of plants called cell wall. This additional layer surrounding the cell membrane is required by plants for protection. Plant cells need protection against variations in temperature, high wind speed, atmospheric moisture etc. They are exposed to these variations because they cannot move. Cells can be observed in the leaf peel of Tradescantia, Elodea or Rhoeo. You can prepare a slide as in the case of onion. 
66 The only food that man eats produced by the insects is honey . 
1549 This wonderful emblem which instills a feeling of patrio - tism is mounted on a beautiful lotus flower which faces downwards . 
302 The responsibility of man in maintaining balance of an environment : Starting from the producer up to the highest consumer there is a proportion of number of different tropical level in the ecosystem . 
1614 He stayed in an island named Lesbos for five years continuously and made research on animals . 
957 Gangamma: She is a water goddess who protects fishermen who go out into the sea. 
666 Honey has probably been associated with man since very early days. 
280 To an important degree, a person s age influences what he needs, buys, does and his capacity to perform. 
1706 In the Syrian coast it rains in winter but the interior is without rain and remains dry . 
1766 Eye , ear , nose and tongue are the sensory organs present in head region . 
646 I heard my mother and my aunt talking about my cousin who is going to have a baby. They were discussing whether she would give birth to a boy or a girl. I wonder what makes the fertilised egg develop either into a boy or a girl! 
247 It is a process that demands a lot of men and material resourses . 
805 . The goal of all political associations is the preservation of the natural rights of woman and man: These rights are liberty, property, security, and above all resistance to oppression. 
1665 Do you think this practice is appropriate? How do farmers benefit from this process? 
18 He survives his limitations because of his developed intelligence , does nt he ? 
586 Now you have a fair understanding of the great men who have contributed to the branch of evolutionary science . 
94 A mountain climber who is climbing a mountain in the Drakensberg during winter, by mistake drops her water bottle which then slides down the side of a steep icy slope to a point which is m lower than the climber's position. The mass of the climber is and her water bottle has a mass of . 
365 He dreams about being handsome , strong intelligent , having achievement in any field , expects everybody to identify and respect him etc. , If such wishes arise in students , they guide them to reach their goal . 
1727 Milk or whipped curd is to be mixed . 
562 To save non - infected persons : The germs of tuberculosis may be present in a normal man . 
1345 Political mobilisation on religious lines is another frequent form of communalism. This involves the use of sacred symbols, religious leaders, emotional appeal and plain fear in order to bring the followers of one religion together in the political arena. In electoral politics this often involves special appeal to the interests or emotions of voters of one religion in preference to others. 
681 Patient should be vomited either by inserting his own nger into his mouth or by consuming lukewarm salt water . 
461 To communicate with others man used various methods . 
923 The man who is regarded as low by the brahmin,even the scavenger 
629 Make a list of the food that you have eaten from different parts of India. Make a list of the languages besides your mother tongue that you can speak at least one or two words of. 
1715 Fig. The Storming of Seringapatam, painted by Rober Kerr Porter (panorama in oil, ) 
103 . In Activity your teacher suggested not to harm other plants when you collect plants for observations. Why did she suggest so? 
1122 To use a dichotomous key to identify arthropods. 
812 (a) why she dips the thermometer in a liquid before use. 
60 The runner should keep his head and neck in line with his trunk . 
1404 More than 12 hours of photoperiods delayed flowering . 
1977 The humidity of the air can be expressed in two ways such as , absolute humidity and relative humidity . 
1044 Cereals - Cereals are the rich sources of calorie because they contain large amount of starch . 
1832 Paithan , Karle , Kanheri , Junnar and Nasik of Maharastra , Dhanyaketa of Andhrapradesh and Vyjayanthi of Uttara Kannda district were the main centres of trade . 
1691 Armed forces of member states including India are part of the peace keeping force deployed in Congo now . 
1403 ( If combustion takes place , mark the substance as combustible , otherwise , mark it as non-combustible . 
877 Activity . : Draw a circle on the oor make a person A to stand on the circumference and you stand at the centre facing A. Let A rotate on his feet and also come around you on the circumference once . 
1615 The following two laws of chemical combination were established after much experimentations by Lavoisier and Joseph L. Proust. 
1296 . In what ways were the maps prepared by the British different from the one made by Ptolemy or Idrisi? AS 
1472 Due to this , fountain water is called mineral water too . 
1814 Let's think of another example of baking a cake. Imagine you have just finished baking a cake in the oven at C. 
177 RELATIoNSHIP BETwEEN MAN AND MICRoBES Balances , uses imbalances and All existing things in the world and theuniversearounditmadeupoffive basicelements , theearth , water , fire , - air and space . 
778 He allocates the portfolios of the ministers . 
1525 The new religions became a ray of hope in the changed circumstances . 
817 The Gond Patla too had to occasionally defend the village from outsiders at such times all the villagers would get together and fight on behalf of the village. We also saw that he met the expenses of entertaining guests and holding festivals from the extra income he got from the one day labour of the villagers on his fields. But such income was far too little for a tribal headman to become rich or powerful. The ordinary people of the tribe would only support the headman or obey his commands if they were convinced that it was in the interest of all. 
842 After the death of Mallasarja , she fought bravely against the British and she has been called a brave woman . 
355 But, What is there in bigness Are you not the slave of man who is smaller than you? 
89 To which class does man belong ? 
219 He holds the decorated bow along with two slender wooden rods called veesukol . 
1367 Water is a very good re extinguisher . 
440 He can only change the form or shape or the place of a material given by nature and thereby create new utility on it . 
732 Location : Voluntary muscles remain attached with the skeletal system as muscles of - hand , and feet of man . 
324 Using an accurate balance the learner accurately measures the correct mass of the NaOH pellets. To the pellets he now adds exactly of pure water. Will his solution have the correct concentration? Explain your answer. 
1309 On the eighth day , Durgadevi is worshipped , and on the ninth day , all weapons , vehicles , machines are cleaned and wor - shipped . 
1551 When we touch ice , we feel cold . 
988 To develop a sense of humanity among the children is also a responsibility of a housewife . 
1591 Dwarkanath Tagore believed that India would develop through westernisation and industrialisation. He invested in shipping, shipbuilding, mining, banking, plantations 
80 Look carefully at the painting and identify the objects which are political symbols you saw in Box (broken chain, red cap, fasces, Charter of the Declaration of Rights). The pyramid stands for equality, often represented by a triangle. Use the symbols to interpret the painting. Describe your impressions of the female figure of liberty. 
163 If man wears beautiful designed clean clothes he feels happy . 
1647 Place the porcelain basin on a wire gauge or a sand bath and heat it gently . 
248 Everybody gets recognition according to his rank by wearing office dress . 
369 So the work becomes monotonous and unattractive to him . 
808 Raider has to start chanting Kabaddi from his court in one breath . 
1945 b ) Graph recorded data to show daily and seasonal patterns in weather . 
330 If the speed of a sprinter is ms- , calculate the time taken by him to run a distance of m. Use this magic triangle to nd the formula for terms D and t . 
1669 The animals are tied with a thread to the food they eat . 
632 When cooking the person should wear her clothes tightly . 
1072 From Salima s observations, we surmise that there is a close relationship between height of land and the character of vegetations. With the change in height, the climate changes and that changes natural vegetation. The growth of vegetation depends on temperature and moisture. It also depends on factors like slope and thickness of soil. 
636 For example , washer men , tailors , blacksmiths , potters , cobblers etc earn money from their professions across the villages and towns of Bangladesh . 
5 Various designs in clothing are found depending on country , time , man , woman and person . 
136 etc. , cause Communicable Parasitic bacteria , protozoans , various viruses , communicable diseases in man . 
1078 to Poverty Reduce and Unemployment : Poverty is the result of lack of money to meet basic needs . 
1616 This skill helps to maintain safe distance run from the chaser and all along the eld , keeping an eye on the chaser movement . 
917 Long years ago we made a tryst with destiny, and now the time comes when we shall redeem our pledge, not wholly or in full measure, but very substantially. At the stroke of the midnight hour, when the world sleeps, India will awake to life and freedom. A moment comes, which comes but rarely in history, when we step out from the old to the new, when an age ends, and when the soul of a nation, long suppressed, finds utterance. It is fitting that at this solemn moment we take the pledge of dedication to the service of India and her people and to the still larger cause of humanity 
1383 It touches the contact terminal again , completing the circuit and the process is repeated . 
1218 Ties between members of households loosened, and among the working class the institution of marriage tended to break down. Women of the upper and middle classes in Britain, on the other hand, faced increasingly higher levels of isolation, although their lives were made easier by domestic maids who cooked, cleaned and cared for young children on low wages. 
1573 In the beginning , the people would depend on their muscle power . 
835 Men can not hear this sound but dog hears it and comes to his master . 
885 He saw the peacock dancing gracefully at the onset of monsoon and he could see some grace and poise even in the deadly tiger and snake . 
17 Although the family has difficulty in arranging two meals a day , Ramlakhan manages to buy milk once in a while , but only for his son . 
1818 After Ranabhaire Gowda , Jayagowda , Gidde Gowda , Kempananje Gowda and others ruled . 
1937 . Sound is Produced by a Vibrating Body 
1987 In this method the coverings of the shoots are not completely separated from the shoots ; rather they are tied on the opposite direction and hung . 
1545 In Grade you will learn that the mechanisms of these reactions are actually slightly more complex than this, but for now, understanding it at this level is good enough. 
833 A herder is herding his sheep into the kraal. A mother sheep and its lamb are both running at towards the kraal. The sheep has a mass of and the lamb has a mass of . Calculate the kinetic energy for each of the sheep and the lamb. 
867 My father , taking the help of another person , built the mud walls . 
578 For example , for bulky and short size girls , use of vertical long lines is appropriate in clothing . 
1896 Static friction is than the sliding friction . 
150 The mother ' s contribution in helping the child to develop self confidence is very great . 
1578 Have you attaining the age of Adolescence ? 
1550 The type of money by which prices are determined , transactions are accounted and receipts and payments are settled is called nominal money . 
304 However , for the welfare of the family , a home manager should carry out her duties and responsibilities properly . 
1798 Learn more about the Joule, an electric car made right here in South Africa.bit.ly/IGC 
744 He then places another foot one step ahead . 
1563 Viruses cause many diseases in plants and animals . 
1529 What are the crops mentioned in the above statements ? 
1320 The wheel is the reflection of the wheel engraved in Ashoka Pillar of Saranath . 
1237 Such examples lead some people to conclude that politics and social divisions must not be allowed to mix. They think that it would be best if there are no social divisions in any country. If social divisions do exist in a country, they must never be expressed in politics. 
360 He also would have realised that bamboos could be bent to make various things . 
623 A consumer buys a product at a certain price according to his need . 
263 Generally he is of IAS ( Indian Administrative Services ) cadre . 
1049 This thin membrane is called nictitating membrane . 
1045 As an universal solvent , it allows substances to dissolve in it . 
162 Which group of organisms has the most proximity to man ? 
975 The common man ? s food is almost totally carbohydrates . 
861 She has to shoulder and manage various responsibilities to run the family in proper order . 
731 bottle gourd, watermelon and papaya or any other plant bearing unisexual flower, whether the male and female flowers are born on the same plant or on separate plants? 
757 When a person has breathing problems he is given oxygen. 
689 The story of Indulekha is interesting in the light of these debates. Suri Nambuthiri, the foolish landlord who comes to marry Indulekha, is the focus of much satire in the novel. The intelligent heroine rejects him and chooses Madhavan, the educated and handsome Nayar as her husband, and the young couple move to Madras, where Madhavan joins the civil service. Suri Nambuthiri, desperate to find a partner for himself, finally marries a poorer relation from the same family and goes away pretending that he has married Indulekha! Chandu Menon clearly wanted his readers to appreciate the new values of his hero and heroine and criticise the ignorance and immorality of Suri Nambuthiri. 
1199 This effort of August Comte was strongly supported by Hebert Spencer , Emile Durkheim , Max Weber and others . 
1512 The people of India decide their political fortune through elections . 
511 Comparison of man with other animals based on the variations in the number of amino acids in b chain of haemoglobin Chimpanzee Gorilla Rhesus monkey Dog Man Table - . . 
312 The teacher told them that she would take them to the ground to play kho - kho . 
291 is considered that the stage of cultural growth started from this ancestor of man . 
1502 (ii) Does it produce a lot of smoke? 
881 The rights of a citizen mean his opportunities and privileges . 
1584 It will be easier to work or buy equipment if it is listed properly as per size and structure according to the necessity of its uses . 
751 In his daily life man faces the unlimited wants of goods like food , clothing , housing , medicine etc . 
411 At the top of the slope, her potential energy is: 
482 In course of time fire was discovered and he learnt to eat cooked food . 
610 . The rear view mirror of a car is a plane mirror. A driver is reversing his car at a speed of m/s. The driver sees in his rear view mirror the image of a truck parked behind his car. The speed at which the image of the truck appears to approach the driver will be 
1305 These gases collected around the earth over millions of years and became the atmosphere . 
1990 You may recall that the Kakatiya capital city Orugallu was so designed as to have the temple of Svayambhu Shiva at the centre. This was built by the Kakatiyas to proclaim their power and status as independent kings. 
1608 All the MLAs of the Vidhan Sabha of Andhra Pradesh participate in the election of the President. 
7 If there is a noisy environment , the sleep of the baby is hampered which is not good for his health . 
1131 A few sources of energy are listed above. There are many other sources of energy. List them. 
439 As a result , he gradually becomes skilled and efficient in that work . 
1056 It increases the resistance power to fight diseases . 
1433 This white clay is used for the production of Chinawares ( Crockeries ) , electric insulators and sanitary materials . 
1187 If you close the letter you want to calculate , then you will nd the RHS . 
446 The duties and responsibilities of a home manager towards her family can be classified into two groups . 
1804 The rst lines of national anthem is taken from the work ' Geetanjali ' written by the Nobel Prize Winner and a renowned Poet Rabindranath Tagore . 
955 A man is to be engaged in more activities to satisfy his ever increasing wants . 
328 Again it may so happen that the patient feels that his whole body is paralised . 
969 The rent he paid to the zamindar was high and his right on the land was insecure. To pay the rent he had to take loan often from the moneylender, and when he failed to pay the rent he was evicted from the land he had cultivated for generations. 
1188 Waterways : Waterways include river and ocean routes . 
336 If she borrows Rs. from a moneylender, he give her only Rs. and she has to pay back Rs. on the next day. 
4 Humanism - the concept that man is the measure of all things 
1518 This has caused the food production in our country to rise . 
106 A person ' s satisfaction in food and good health are closely linked with good nutrient food that are taken by him . 
998 The entrepreneur himself plans for the establishment of the business firm . 
1734 Our planet earth also pulls all objects toward itself . 
392 Man takes food when he / she feels hungry . 
773 Don't his actions point to that ? 
485 In Chapter , we learnt how the people of a tribal society govern themselves how male members of different families of the tribe gather to discuss and decide and how the headman implements those decisions etc. 
187 Fossil of this modern man was discovered first in France . 
763 Chasing Skills : - a ) Sitting in the box : - Types of sitting in the box ) Parallel toe Method : In this method the chaser sits in his box keeping both his feet parallel and in line with each other . 
860 Suppose a person wishes to open a savings account with a branch of Agrani Bank in his home town . 
298 It shows that the intervention of man through the effective use of resources can make modifications on a culture . 
741 Light and Sound The vocal cords in men are about mm long . 
1214 You must remember the role that the banks play here. But for the banks, there would be no demand deposits and no payments by cheques against these deposits. The modern forms of money currency and deposits are closely linked to the working of the modern banking system. 
1354 Though the moon is smaller in size , it covers such a bigger sun . 
1912 In a square shaped room , a table and four chairs have to be arranged . 
1725 Left with no other option , America was forced to withdraw from Saigon , the capital of South Vietnam on th April , . 
1958 Write sentences about any folk art that you have witnessed . 
1717 The climate is conducive for fruits cultivation . 
1862 They carry on breeding and spread germs . 
1000 Digestive System of man MoRE To KNoW Food takes an average of hours to pass all the way through the digestive system . 
771 The subject matter of economics deals with the analysis of economic problems of men in the society and the satisfaction of their wants . 
1926 You have studied the test of carbon dioxide with lime water in the section of discovery of carbon dioxide 
469 So conflicts arise between the animals and man . 
1737 Where is our Sun located within our own Milky Way Galaxy? 
374 Even after using his strength if he is unable to escape , there is another technique of escaping . 
170 However , man is paramount among all resources . 
697 AIL people regardless of male , female , religion and caste will enjoy these rights equally . 
807 We can achieve tidiness by bringing together a person with his clothing and cosmetics . 
1972 Kolleru sanctuary West Godavari water birds, herons, flammingos 
1488 It has four allotropic forms which are rhombic sulphur , monoclinic sulphur , plastic sulphur and white sulphur . 
1498 Then the inactive food material is taken inside the body . 
1358 It is permanent some times reversible ( may or may not be ) . 
951 The mental attitude and power of a housewife can be assessed by this . 
946 When a person pays the tax imposed on him , the burden of the tax is borne by him . 
879 The individual may feel relaxed but does not realise that his sense of judgement, sense of timing, and muscular coordination have been seriously impaired. 
1708 Sweet and hot chilli contain high amount of Vitamin C and little amount of vitamin A and E . 
276 I impeach him in the name of the people of India, whose rights he has trodden under his foot and whose country he has turned into a desert. Lastly in the name of human nature itself, in the name of both the sexes, in the name of every age, in the name of every rank, I impeach the common enemy and oppressor of all. 
1325 Nepenthes ( pitcher plant ) Insectivorous Plants We know that many insects eat plants , but we shall be surprised to know that some plants eat insects . 
907 If the customer behaves nicely with the salesman , he may get the best thing in the shop . 
1837 . How can you help in reducing the problem of waste disposal? Give any two methods. 
891 The post man gave it to me . 
1645 we will read in due time and play in due time . 
1076 We can see electromagnetic train in Japan , China , France , Germany and America . 
1519 Before you start, imagine what the mixture would look like. Draw a picture of the a clear container and the different contents in the mixture in the space. 
825 He stands with his knees slightly exed and upper body bent slightly forward . 
1400 BULL FIGHT Divide the students in to two equal groups and make them stand in two lines facing each other . 
533 Example : The sign used by the teacher to maintain silence when she is teaching-if your friend speaks , a nger on the mouth . 
1278 Stamps : Stamps have to be affixed on different documents , applications for law suits , passports etc . 
670 (d) The fusion of male and female gametes is termed as . 
1386 . Prepare a model of any microorganism. And write a note on them. (AS ) 
1898 The aqueous humour formed from the blood is reabsorbed into the blood itself . 
1910 FIRE SAFETY Fire is an important element in our day-to-day life . 
1449 Know this : Fuels are the various minerals and their products . 
1485 He was successful in rallying all sections of population against the British through the non-violent means of non-cooperation . 
1820 On the contrary , the red corpuscles of the blood of mammals are biconvex , non nucleated and round . 
1476 Watch a video demonstration of the test for glucose. 
597 Three hundred fish are needed to support one man for a year. The trout, in turn, must consume frogs, that must consume million grasshoppers that live off tons of grass. 
1013 Why is it Important to Separate Religion from the State? 
1811 That ' s why blue litmus becomes red . 
1303 The biceps brachii muscle gets its name from being a two-headed muscle, attaching to the scapula at two points. Although it is commonly referred to as a `bicep', biceps is the correct form even in the singular. Similarly, the triceps brachii muscle joins at three points, and should be referred to as the triceps, whether you are talking about one or both arms. 
981 If the salesman is shown good behaviour , he will help to collect the necessary item of the customer in his own initiative . 
1328 . Why do you think only a few people attend the Gram Sabha meeting? AS 
1481 The various chapters in this book have tried to make clear to you the democratic ideals that the Constitution contains and the ways in which it affects people s daily lives. We have done this with the intent that this might provide you the tools with which you can critically begin to understand and examine the world around you, and participate in it as the Constitution prescribes. 
1047 The most important of them was the Sargeant Commission of . 
733 If anyone has been a member of any committee in the last three years, he cannot become a member of another committee. 
779 To bear this huge responsibility , she has to possess some basic qualities after making remarkable efforts with honesty and sincerity . 
1763 Solar energy is essential for plants to grow . 
430 On the whistle of the teacher the first member of each group runs as fast as possible , tell he circles the marker and comes to the start - ing line . 
1088 Why is the weight on the block being changed when the aim of the investigation is to find out how the normal force affects frictional force? 
1839 The process of depositing a layer of any desired metal on another material by means of electricity is called electroplating. It is one of the most common applications of chemical effects of electric current. 
437 Thunder may strike even head of a man standing in the field . 
719 At this , his mental development is hampered and his outlook becomes narrow . 
487 If one can analyse his own personality , he can evaluate other ' s personality also . 
794 Activity : Reproduction of plants is advantageous to animals including man in many ways . 
1905 It is the major site of respiratory activities in the cell . 
873 Potheri Kunjambu, a lower-caste writer from north Kerala, wrote a novel called Saraswativijayam in , mounting a strong attack on caste oppression. This novel shows a young man from an untouchable caste, leaving his village to escape the cruelty of his Brahmin landlord. He converts to Christianity, obtains modern education, and returns as the judge in the local court. Meanwhile, the villagers, thinking that the landlord s men had killed him, file a case. At the conclusion of the trial, the judge reveals his true identity, and the Nambuthiri repents and reforms his ways. Saraswativijayam stresses the importance of education for the upliftment of the lower castes. 
1503 The Sparks that the Greeks Knew About ! 
1588 If the death rate is high , it is evident that people are the victims of malnutrition and the lack of sufficient medical facilities . 
708 A family becomes happy and prosperous with the establishment of sons and daughters . 
756 The organization where there is only one owner who procures capital by his own personal initiative and discharges all the responsibilities of the business including risk bearing , is called Single Ownership Business . 
1655 Calculate the frequency of an electromagnetic wave with a wavelength of . 
1209 The heat wave of July that spread panic in the Chicago city raised the air temperature as much as F . 
1610 a ) a positive charge b ) a negative charge c ) air . 
1743 S. No. Name of the student Volume of Kalakanda Volume of Patika 
1467 The light energy from the sun is stored in the form of chemical energy in the carbohydrate produced in the green plants . 
450 . A driver of a car travelling at km h applies the brakes and accelerates uniformly in the opposite direction. The car stops in s. Another driver going at km h in another car applies his brakes slowly and stops in s. On the same graph paper, plot the speed versus time graphs for the two cars. Which of the two cars travelled farther after the brakes were applied? 
889 India won her independence from the British . 
827 Charles Darwin set out on a voyage when he was years old. The five-year voyage took him to South America and the islands off its coast. The studies that he conducted during this voyage were to change forever the way we look at the variety of life on earth. Interestingly, after he got back to England, he never left its shores again. He stayed at home and conducted various experiments that led him to formulate his hypothesis that evolution took place due to natural selection. He did not know the mechanism whereby variations arose in the species. He would have been enlightened by Mendel s experiments, but these two gentlemen did not know of each other or their work! 
1426 . Compare the roles of people who make laws with those who implement them in the following aspects: AS 
752 They cause different diseases of man and plants . 
1243 An open circuit with two cells, two light bulbs and a switch in series. [ marks] 
436 Mutual Fund Common man and retail investors find difficulty in investing the money in share market . 
704 He has to be engaged in the study of the consumers propensity to demand , storing of goods and in preserving them for proper marketing . 
97 Talk to a shop owner in a market and find out how he plans his work. Have there been any changes in his business in the past twenty years? 
146 Many people think that men lived in small families from the primitive period . 
1514 Hence , without culture there is no society and without society there is no culture . 
601 When your mother gives upma for breakfast you pick out pieces of chillies in it . 
875 Side by side , she should teach the family members the social customs , manners and ideology and also encourage them to exercise those properly . 
29 Stereotype: When we believe that people belonging to particular groups based on religion, wealth, language are bound to have certain fixed characteristics or can only do a certain type of work, we create a stereotype. For example, in this chapter, we saw how boys and girls are made to take certain subjects not because he or she has an aptitude for it, but because they are either boys or girls. Stereotypes prevent us from looking at people as unique individuals. 
850 The colonial bungalow was quite different from the haveli. Meant for one nuclear family, it was a large single-storeyed structure with a pitched roof, and usually set in one or two acres of open ground. It had separate living and dining rooms and bedrooms, and a wide veranda running in the front, and sometimes on three sides. Kitchens, stables and servants quarters were in a separate space from the main house. The house was run by dozens of servants. The women of the household often sat on the verandas to supervise tailors or other tradesmen. 
271 Modern cricket is dominated by Tests and one-day internationals, played between national teams. The players who become famous, who live on in the memories of cricket s public, are those who have played for their country. The players Indian fans remember from the era of the Pentangular and the Quadrangular are those who were fortunate enough to play Test cricket. C.K. Nayudu, an outstanding Indian batsman of his time, lives on in the popular imagination when some of his great contemporaries like Palwankar Vithal and Palwankar Baloo have been forgotten because his career lasted long enough for him to play Test cricket for India while theirs did not. 
575 The other aspect of Hitler s ideology related to the geopolitical concept of Lebensraum, or living space. He believed that new territories had to be acquired for settlement. This would enhance the area of the mother country, while enabling the settlers on new lands to retain an intimate link with the place of their origin. It would also enhance the material resources and power of the German nation. 
921 Normally women workers earn about Rs.- per day, whereas men workers get Rs. per day. During harvest or sowing seasons, women workers get Rs. - per day, whereas male workers get Rs.- per day. In the government employment scheme, men as well as women get about Rs. per day. In non-agricultural activities such as loading and unloading of sand or bricks and construction works, they get a little more Rs. - for men and Rs. for women. But such work is scarce. 
339 Whenever a headman becomes arrogant and goes against the wishes of the people, the Panch may remove him and replace him with another person. Alternatively, the other families may just leave the village and settle in a new place. 
228 Fibres can be natural or man-made. 
1116 (density = mass/volume). Arrange the following in order of increasing density air, exhaust from chimneys, honey, water, chalk, cotton and iron. 
31 Many times , he is tried by social laws and punished . 
987 At the same time , man is the only cause for the loss of bio-diversity . 
1256 We see our face in the mirror everyday. Is this picture in mirror a shadow or an image? How did you decide that? 
660 The final stage of an election is the day when the voters cast or poll their vote. That day is usually called the election day. Every person whose name is on the voters list can go to a nearby polling booth , situated usually in a local school or a government office. Once the voter goes inside the booth, the election officials identify her, put a mark on her finger and allow her to cast her vote. An agent of each candidate is allowed to sit inside the polling booth and ensure that the voting takes place in a fair way. 
1016 If there is a difference, what is the reason for it? 
706 Man - Homo sapiens . 
937 Among these , except coal , all others are man made . 
347 For malnutrition man suffers from various diseases . 
1333 Blood is filtered by the kidneys. Lymph is filtered by lymph nodes located throughout the body. 
785 Rabindranath Tagore (-) developed the Bengali novel after Bankim s death. His early novels were historical; he later shifted to writing stories about domestic relationships. He was mainly preoccupied with the condition of women and nationalism. Both concerns are featured in his Ghare Baire () translated in as The Home and the World. The story is about Bimala, the wife of Nikhilesh, a liberal landlord who believes that he can save his country by patiently bettering the lives of its poor and marginal sections. But Bimala is attracted to Sandip, her husband s friend and a firebrand extremist. Sandip is so completely dedicated to throwing out the British that he does not mind if the poor low castes suffer and Muslims are made to feel like outsiders. By becoming a part of Sandip s group, Bimala gets a sense of self-worth and self-esteem. Rabindranth also shows the contradictory effects of nationalist involvement for women. Bimala may be admired by the young males of the group but she cannot influence their decisions. Indeed she is used by Sandip to acquire funds for the movement. Tagore s novels are striking because they make us rethink both man-woman relationships and nationalism. 
157 For boys clothes also should be selected based on features or bodies . 
1308 These substances cause serious problems , and their use leads to addiction . 
442 Man is a social being . 
1602 Idgah An open prayer place of Muslims primarily meant for id prayers 
12 Thus gradually the importance of labour increased , man needed capital for cultivation , setting up factories and for increasing production . 
1513 This example says step forward and then another step forward is the same as an arrow twice as long two steps forward. 
1207 On the basis of indicators , analyse the description given below and form inferences about immunity to diseases through vaccines . 
1270 to keep the nucleoplasm , chromosome and the nucleus distinct from cytoplasm . 
1062 The universalization of English education profited the Indians . 
376 Monkey , elephant , bat , cat , rat , blue whale and man are examples of mammals . 
128 . One medical store owner is giving antibiotics to his customer who is suffering from fever without a doctor s prescription? 
1456 Many Jahagirs ( Land gifts ) were given . 
67 His father was Varadappa Nayaka and mother Leelavathi . 
51 (c) Your friend has been sold a medicine that has crossed the expiry date and you are advising her to lodge a complaint ( ). 
21 Man also understood that plants grow better in soil that had been loosened . 
30 Agriculture for subsistence : Agriculture which helps a farmer to produce agricultural products to meet the bare subsistence of his family is called agriculture for subsistence . 
1030 Negative emotions may harm the physical and mental health of individuals when they are not expressed in an appropriate way . 
59 The chaser keeps both his hands outside the center line out of the box without folding his arms . 
1039 By the s, weavers faced a new problem. They could not get sufficient supply of raw cotton of good quality. When the American Civil War broke out and cotton supplies from the US were cut off, Britain turned to India. As raw cotton exports from India increased, the price of raw cotton shot up. Weavers in India were starved of supplies and forced to buy raw cotton at exorbitant prices. In this, situation weaving could not pay. 
1903 Here the computer saves all its information and analyses that information in many different ways . 
1053 The Pallavas were at the peak of glory in South Deccan . 
415 The students with speci c numbers run towards the teacher and form that number in front of him . 
1720 So these people started producing their own food during Neolithic age . 
1604 In case of need few chairs can be placed in one corner of the room . 
191 An object may appear to be moving for one person and stationary for some other. For the passengers in a moving bus, the roadside trees appear to be moving backwards. A person standing on the road side perceives the bus alongwith the passengers as moving. However, a passenger inside the bus sees his fellow passengers to be at rest. What do these observations indicate? 
976 The Father of History ' , Herodotus and Thucydides were great historians . 
1155 Group of organisms that breed among themselves and produce fertile offsprings make a . 
603 Her brother may not like this. 
1648 (v) Name the fibre crops and name the climatic conditions required for their growth. 
810 Again , a farmer tries to earn to increase his income by fishing or by running business side by side with his farming profession . 
1100 If ultraviolet radiation were not absorbed by ozone, it would reach the earth s surface and cause harm to us and other life forms. Ozone acts as a natural shield against this radiation. 
522 . Under what soil condition do you think a farmer would treat the soil of his fields with quick lime (calcium oxide) or slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) or chalk (calcium carbonate)? 
1742 Like water in the above activity, most liquids that conduct electricity are solutions of acids, bases or salts. 
1940 It is a common building without any decorations . 
1670 Other major cash crops includes cotton , sugarcane , banana , tea , oil-palm , tobacco and citrus fruits . 
1146 In this way , Amoeba takes the food material inside the body . 
1001 (iii) Characteristics or qualities of the population: What are their age, sex-composition, literacy levels, occupational structure and health conditions? 
1774 Areas where people used stones to create various tools have been thought to be the first industrial sites of human beings . 
501 Without prior notice the government could search any person or his house . 
120 Such a man 
288 My father brought bamboos from the nearby forest . 
796 In order to move laterally , he should take a convenient position by taking one step forward from the middle of the goal line and creating an imaginary curve between the two goal posts . 
1339 Sea water is saline , as it contains lot of common salt dissolved in it . 
847 g. . Wrist Catch g. . Ankle Catch Thigh Catch : When the raider is standing with legs apart or trying to touch with his hands of defensive player . 
904 Rest portion is left for man , other animals and heterophytic plants . 
1756 classify the sources of water that are suitable for drinking . 
74 He even tries accelerate speed in the last ve to ten metres of the distance . 
1542 Such an environment is called polluted environment . 
1526 Among these rivers , excess rainfall in the basins of the Padma , the Jamuna and the Meghna is the main reason for flood in the country . 
1747 Velocity can be positive or negative. A positive velocity points in the direction you chose as positive in your coordinate system. A negative velocity points in the direction opposite to the positive direction. 
1414 If the soil is basic , the organic matter releases acids , which neutralises the basic nature of soil . 
1597 Direct and Opposite Tides : The moon is continuously moving around the earth . 
1075 (ii) . number of He atoms (finding mole from number of particles). 
1119 (c) AC generator will generate a higher voltage. 
1254 In the forest , there are always interesting things to see . 
504 MLA : My constituency of Tolpatti too has a serious shortage of water. Women travel up to or kilometres to collect water. How many tankers have been put into service to supply water? How many wells and ponds have been cleaned and disinfected? 
1893 The change is due to the movement of molecules . 
1220 Based on The Times Atlas of World History, (ed. Geoffrey Barraclough) Hammond Inc, New Jersey, , pp -. 
826 As a social being , a man creates his family . 
1008 Why is separation of substances necessary in our daily life ? 
1230 About 21 % of the GNP ( Gross National Product ) comes from agriculture . 
555 They justified their domination as Civilising Missionand White Man 's burden. 
685 Whatever he takes is not always digested properly . 
909 As social science economics deals with the economic activities of man . 
1855 If the angle of incidence is the angle of reflection is ( , , , ) . 
1586 Act : Morley Minto reforms did not satisfy the Indians . 
357 It is inferred that this ancestor of man began walking on two legs . 
1012 The parts of all kinds of sewing machine are more or less same . 
1372 Our industries , agricultures and societies are being developed with the help of electricity . 
416 The number of male is 51 percent and the number of female is 49 . 
465 Men sweat profusely in summer owing to hard work . 
1579 Excessive cold or respiratory tract infection may lead to pneumonia . 
394 Vector example mosquito Microorganisms . man . 
1163 It is remarkable to note that the length of the scale and the number of divisions would depend on the nature of the scales to be drawn . 
600 They also help their mothers in cooking and performing other domestic chores . 
92 They call durian the king of fruits . 
270 Location : Voluntary muscles remain attached with the skeletal system as muscles of - hand , and feet of man . 
1150 inlet for hard water soft water permutit brine solution outlet for soft water coarse sand and gravel other uses Fig. . : Ion exchange process Zeolite is a mixture of sodium , aluminium and silicates . 
2 Your mother cleans the rice by separating husk , mud particles , in it before cooking . 
1493 During Atharva Veda period Angas were living in the east Bihar and the Magadh tribe in central Bihar , south of the river Ganga . 
628 That is why soil is compared to mother . 
527 He should be given full rest in a place of proper ventilation . 
1405 Kessowjee Naik brought his dyers back to their old quarters. I prosecuted them, but was defeated. Kessowjee Naik spent money like water, eminent physicians swore solemnly that dye pits were beneficial to health! This infamous success emboldened a powerful German firm to open a large steam Dyeing Factory close to Parbadevi Temple whose refuse waters polluted the fair sands of Mahim Bay Last but not least Bhoys and Dasses, Shenvis Brahmins and all the Jees, set up cotton and spinning mills anywhere their sweet will prompted them: for example close to the Byculla Club itself, around the Race Course and Kamathippora 
1369 Which states have more than Lok Sabha Constituencies? 
180 On the other hand , the grand fathers and grand mothers think that they are important persons of the family . 
1792 Duration of earth 's Duration of earth 's Planets rotation revolution Mercury Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune days days hours hrs , min hrs hrs . min hrs . min hrs . min days days days days years years years years . 
1152 Its composition can be represented by the chemical formula . 
1927 you can see me only in the animal cell . 
1443 Hence , it is commonly said all esh is grass . 
197 He cannot live alone . 
1795 A group of cells with similar structure and function is a a ) tissue c ) organ system b ) organ d ) organism II . 
965 Man as well as plant have a close relationship with the soil . 
1407 THOM , GEGS , VARAL , APPU MOTH - &gt; - &gt; - &gt; . 
524 These officers and army were employees of the king.Therefore, they were bound to follow his orders and the king could ensure that his commands for the common people were obeyed by them. 
1068 Meharuli 's iron pillar and Vijayapura 's whispering Golgumbuz are the evidences of the maturity of then Science and Technical knowledge . 
452 If a man fails to lift a heavy stone no work is said to be done . 
972 An optometrist holds a lens in front of a patient's eye to correct her vision.The following image shows how lenses can be used to correct far and near-sightedness. 
1048 Reflection from a rough or irregular surface is called irregular reflection or diffused reflection (see figure ). Images are not clear in case of irregular reflection. In some cases we can t find the image at all. 
164 He wins the heart of the people easily by gentle behaviour and good manners . 
1038 From the above discussion , it can be said that differences in plants and agricultural products is due to variation in climatic conditions in different regions . 
203 In this kind of agriculture the farmer engages only the members of his family . 
395 When he is showing the back , then it is assumed that it is night . 
887 Calculate the difference between the climber's potential energy at the top of the slope and her potential energy at the bottom of the slope 
1833 Indian alchemists were one of the rst people in the world to make alloys . 
622 It spreads before one knows that he has been infected . 
620 The ampere is named after Andr -Marie Amp re (-), a French mathematician and physicist. He is considered the father of electrodynamics, which is the study of the effect of electromagnetic forces between electric charges and currents. 
1378 There were other problems too. The planters usually insisted that indigo be cultivated on the best soils in which peasants preferred to cultivate rice. Indigo, moreover, had deep roots and it exhausted the soil rapidly. After an indigo harvest the land could not be sown with rice. 
529 The catcher acts as if he cathes in this skill . 
232 Good habit will be formed in him . 
409 Male members can go to market and can help the head of the family in cleaning the house . 
568 Man needs food to eat , clothes to wear , house to live , medicine to recover from illness and beverages to drink . 
1650 Now , shall we write the properties of cathode rays from the conclusions ? 
266 The land owner does not directly cultivate the land ; he rather employs hired labour . 
230 Working against gravity The air slows down this skydiver because his parachute has so much surface area . 
647 A person applies hydrogen peroxide on his wound . 
1032 The light rays from the stars pass through the atmosphere , in a zig - zag line and thus the stars appear to twinkle . 
1240 It is an important spice for preparing any Bengali dish . 
516 Some algae are used as food for man and aquatic animals . 
609 If an athlete fails to take his attempt within the alloted time then the attempt is considered foul and the next athlete has been given a chance to take the jump After the jump if an athlete comes back and crosses take off board then such attempt is considered a foul attempt . 
1469 Their protest was aimed at the feudal administration of the Shogunate and their policy of concluding commercial treaties with foreigners . 
47 Perhaps the making of bricks is one of the earliest crafts known to man ! 
602 Give con dence to the injured and his relatives if present nearby and Inform the nearby doctor as early as possible . 
1033 A liquid 's force is acting over an area of m . 
62 Occupation is such an activity through which a person acquires resource for livelihood viz resource might be in the form of cash or kind and this acquired resource is called his income . 
1028 Adolescence is the period of reproductive maturity which lies usually between the ages of to years. 
676 An attempt will be registered in the name of jumper in case if he touches the up rights , cross bar , landing pit before taking off . 
954 The man who is polite and patient listen to what others say , their sorrows , sufferings and try to solve those problems . 
1985 Hey you said that it is cold in the morning . 
1555 Pulakeshi II could not rule the whole of his kingdom from one centre . 
481 Some of you may have seen physical feats demonstrated by some men . 
1863 Its coming back depends upon how far the building is from you . 
1392 What are the major physical divisions of Australia ? 
1239 Fig-: (a) Force applied on a ball at rest. 
130 For example , if the home manager is interested to invite others on any special occasion or in shopping and if she can do it with enthusiasm , this very quality can inspire the children of the family as well . 
1458 Draw a picture of your molecule in the final column of the table. 
1999 To prevent water pollution in our country primarily people should be motivated through different medias . 
1596 So , how does mineral replacement work ? 
942 Once the crop had ripened it had to be harvested. Before the s, the grain used to be harvested with a cradle or sickle. At harvest time, hundreds of men and women could be seen in the fields cutting the crop. In, Cyrus McCormick invented the first mechanical reaper which could cut in one day as much as five men could cut with cradles and men with sickles. 
1592 Experiment : Collect some floating green algae in a beaker containing water from a stagnant water source . 
1108 Balanced diets contain all types of food elements proportionately . 
929 The Commissioner met with this large group and said that he did not have enough trucks. 
639 She should supervise their work accordingly as well . 
642 Godan (The Gift of Cow), published in , remains Premchand s best-known work. It is an epic of the Indian peasantry. The novel tells the moving story of Hori and his wife Dhania, a peasant couple. Landlords, moneylenders, priests and colonial bureaucrats all those who hold power in society form a network of oppression, rob their land and make them into landless labourers. Yet Hori and Dhania retain their dignity to the end. 
315 Let us consider an example of the motion of a body along a closed path. Fig . (a) shows the path of an athlete along a rectangular track ABCD. Let us assume that the athlete runs at a uniform speed on the straight parts AB, BC, CD and DA of the track. In order to keep himself on track, he quickly changes his speed at the corners. How many times will the athlete have to change his direction of motion, while he completes one round? It is clear that to move in a rectangular track once, he has to change his direction of motion four times. 
1890 Scientist proposed a name for every plant known and divided them into different groups . 
1678 Air slows down falling objects on Earth . 
444 policeman . 
216 That is why a man belongs to upper class or middle class or lower class family . 
1520 Aves : Animals which fly in the sky are classified as aves . 
1651 Hills Mountains It is getting very cold as the wind rises up . 
566 Man is a slave to habits . 
613 Attitude of mothers on the food to be served to the child is of much importance . 
912 In view of this ownership of Allah , man will perform the activities in production , earning of livelihood and distribution of resources according to the dictates of Allah . 
1797 Why do children look like their parents ? 
252 I am most anxious that girls should not over-exert themselves, or become absorbed in athletic rivalries, and therefore we do not play against the other schools. I think it is better for girls to learn to take an interest in botany, geology etc., and not make country excursions. 
283 Soon the ryotwari area too was full of landlords who rented out their lands to helpless tenants for very high rents. The tenants had to pay rent that was three to seven times more than the land revenue paid by the ryots to the government. (That is if a ryot paid Rs. /- as land revenue for a piece of land to the government, he was able to get Rs. /- to /- from the tenants for the same land.) As a result they too did not have any interest in investing in improving agriculture, but only in renting it out at higher and higher rates. 
278 Now, it is mandatory for every candidate who contests elections to file an affidavit giving details of his property and criminal cases pending against him. 
1341 The - classificationofkingdomplantaeisgivenbelow Non-flowering plants ( cryptogams ) . . 
1373 . Name four countries on the coast of the Black Sea. AS 
989 Enterprises The main purpose of organiser or producer is to gain profit in production but he may suffer loss due to various reasons and particularly due to uncertainties of future . 
1773 Vessels elements have open ends Water is transported directly to the next cell 
1689 By , a modest economic recovery was under way in most industrial countries. But the Great Depression s wider effects on society, politics and international relations, and on peoples minds, proved more enduring. 
408 The home manager should adjust herself and try to pursue the other members of the family to adjust themselves with the new routine . 
941 The meaning behind that was those people thought beyond the common man in identifying the problems. 
1281 Since the ball moves along a straight line (i.e. left and right), we can use the algebraic technique of vector subtraction just discussed. 
1252 How much is the difference between the income of fifth person and the average income ? 
1698 Application of medication as per physician ' s advice is must . 
208 The painting is a female allegory of liberty that is, the female form symbolises the idea of freedom. 
181 Both men and women participated in this game . 
707 Indicators Which is the common group that includes man and monkeys ? 
286 The flowers which contain either only the pistil or only the stamens are called unisexual flowers. The flowers which contain both stamens and pistil are called bisexual flowers. Corn, papaya and cucumber produce unisexual flowers, whereas mustard, rose and petunia have bisexual flowers. Both the male and the female unisexual flowers may be present in the same plant or in different plants. 
1141 Changes, change in state, duration of day, indicators of change, slow/fast change, temporary/permanent change, natural/man-made change. 
1877 According to encyclopaedia Britannica , ' Nomadic life is a type of life ' . 
690 Some people conceive the idea that family originated from that time when men accepted cultivation as a profession . 
173 He makes use of that money to purchase goods and services he requires . 
1313 It organized Sathyagrahas pressing for the integration of Karnataka and more five thousand people courted arrest . 
61 The periphery of man ' s knowledge has extended a lot . 
462 The principal figure in an Indian district was the Collector. As the title suggests, his main job was to collect revenue and taxes and maintain law and order in his district with the help of judges, police officers and darogas. His office the Collectorate became the new centre of power and patronage that steadily replaced previous holders of authority. 
1569 What do you think the slime is used for? 
390 It leads to financial problems in the family and increased exploitation of women . 
486 Besides these daily activities , a home manager has to arrange a variety of functions related to various occasions and seasons and in performing all these activities , she has to make herself responsible from the beginning to the end . 
952 For example , if a housewife is not able to cook a new item of food , she must try to make it again and again . 
1812 . What will happen if there are no platelets in the blood? 
1936 The Allies would not have been as successful in the First World War and the Second World War if they had not been able to exploit the resources and people of their colonies. Both the world wars had a devastating effect on the forests of India, Indonesia and elsewhere.The forest department cut freely to satisfy war needs. 
1489 umbilical cord: the cord or tube-like structure that connects the foetus at the abdomen with the placenta of the mother and transports nourishment and oxygen to the foetus and removes waste 
1025 Let's take a closer look at what happens inside a power station. Have a look at the following diagram. 
1423 If you feel cold during winter , just remember that in parts of North America and Europe , the temperature in winter can be as low as minus C ( ice everywhere ) . 
1413 Throw light on the government efforts done for improving the condition of agricultural labourers . 
1144 Observe the table carefully, discuss with your teacher and conclude which fertilizer is best to the farmers and why? 
1406 Lightning Conductor is a device used to protect buildings from the effect of lightning. A metallic rod, taller than the building, is installed in the walls of the building during its construction. 
1200 By using it we know about the earth . 
264 He helps us to enter the classrooms in time by ringing the bell . 
1694 What is the dependent variable for this experiment? [ mark] 
1277 ii ) Seed Drill : It is a method of sowing the seeds through the funnel or using two or three pipes having sharp ends . 
1409 The name of their home god is boncher . 
677 a Women always vote the way men tell them to. So what is the point of giving them the right to vote? 
36 If the blood of an AIDS patient is transfused to a healthy person , he / she will also be infected with AIDS . 
499 The sole trader uses his own skill and responsible for all the losses . 
1858 the bottle starts sliding from rest, so its initial velocity is 
1776 Now increase angle of incidence , refracted angle will increase too . 
287 Track formation State , National and International records Introduction : Athletics is known as the father of all the sporting events . 
1693 These white dot like things soon turn black . 
743 Likewise , with the cheque book , he can withdraw money from his account . 
994 III Landing : After clearing the cross bar and during land - ing into the soft pit or sand pit , the jumper has to place his right leg and right hand rst . 
1864 It encouraged Islamic religion and law education . 
341 By man 
33 Flowers are the sexual organs of angiosperms. Many plants have both the male and female reproductive organs in the same flower although some may have male and female structures on different plants all together. 
1531 . Which are the major physiographic divisions of India? Contrast the relief of the Himalayan region with that of the Peninsular plateau. 
25 From this , he starts forming idea of himself . 
96 Is the number and sizes of cells in both man and elephant the same? 
340 . Niharika observed an electrician repairing a street light wearing gloves on his hand. She asked him some questions. What would be those questions? 
966 He implements the decisions of the council . 
322 Bipedal Method : In this method of covering when a chaser receives kho he gets up and starts walking with straight knees and his upper body slightly bent and his hands stretched straight and parallel to the ground . 
944 He aroused people to realise that all men are equal, and that it is the birthright of every individual to enjoy liberty and equality. 
285 A high jumper going over the bar.Think about her jumping, from the moment her feet leave the ground. She goes up in the air, she almost stops as she goes over the bar, and then she comes down again. 
1572 the The unique contribution of the Chalukyan period has been the Vachana literature . 
1377 Surface mining is exactly what the word says - digging rocks out from the surface, forming a hole or pit. In South Africa, this method is used to mine for iron, copper, chromium, manganese, phosphate and coal. 
1099 The lines of force of the magnet cut the coil . 
614 Scouting helps make the boys and girls patriotic , good and ideal citizens . 
1145 Usually rusting can be prevented by covering the metal with paints or grease and by applying oil or grease on the rotating parts of the machine . 
472 Nimone is a village on the Chauphula-Shirur Road. Like many others, this village has also been facing a severe water shortage for the last few months and villagers depend on tankers for all their needs. Bhagvan Mahadeo Lad () of this village was beaten with sticks, iron rods and axes by a group of seven men. The incident came to light when some villagers brought a badly injured Lad to hospital for treatment. In the FIR recorded by the police Lad said that he was attacked when he insisted that the water in the tanker must be emptied into the storage tanks constructed as part of the water supply scheme by Nimone Gram Panchayat so that there would be equal distribution of water. However, he alleged that the upper caste men were against this and told him that the tanker water was not meant for the lower castes. 
1793 Here are some examples of how this rule should be applied: 
648 Father of Yoga is Sage Patanjali who wrote Yoga Sutra in the nd century B.C. . 
75 At the stage of implementation , she has to take decision on how , by whom and where these jobs will be done . 
48 Both young boys and girls take part in religious and social functions . 
1471 In , ' Dalit writers and artists association ' was started in Bhadravathi . 
245 . If you have someone working as a domestic help in your house or locality talk to her and find out a little bit more about her life Who are her family members? Where is her home? How many hours does she work? How much does she get paid? Write a small story based on these details. 
168 In those days bards and religious story tellers (like harikatha) used to wander around telling stories of the various gods and goddesses like Shiva, Vishnu or Durga or stories of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. 
531 As labour is bodily connected with the labourer , the presence of a labourer is indispensable at the time of selling his labour . 
1671 Prepare separately a % solution of any one pair of substances listed under X and Y in water. 
1431 This will keep the clothes clean and return its newness . 
900 The player places more stress on his thumb nger in this method . 
1952 _______ The fertilised egg is implanted in the uterine lining. 
1374 The end of the muscle form thick white bundles before attaching to the bones . 
335 The Nizams who ruled Hyderabad state were under the British and had to follow their policies. In the first half of th century they tried to collect maximum land revenue through deshmukhs and it resulted in desertion of lands by peasants and complete decline of agriculture. In view of this situation, the Nizam s government set up a new land revenue arrangement by which the government appointed district officials to collect land revenue directly. The old landlords were compensated with an annual payment called rusum and they were also given patta rights of full ownership over the land and adjoining waste lands and forests. As the landlords realized that there was a large export market for several agricultural products like castor groundnut etc. they brought more waste lands under cultivation to grow these crops. But who will work on those lands? They expanded the scope of vetti or unpaid labour by forcing ordinary peasants and village artisan and service castes to work on landlord s lands. The large landlords were called Doras . The Doras lived in large fortified houses called gadi and had a large retinue of servants and soldiers. They had vast lands cultivated by tenants and also lands directly cultivated with forced labour. They acted as village moneylenders too. They also had judicial powers over the entire village. They settled all village disputes and were usually partisan towards the upper castes. Other village officials like patwaris and smaller landlords too had to abide by their orders. They forcibly ensured that the lower caste labourers worked for all the upper castes and especially the landlords. They enforced such rules like no lower caste person could wear shirts or slippers or wear a turban, and always remain bent before the doras and address them as their masters. 
1735 Athens and Sparta were the two important city states of Greece . 
410 Man landed on the Moon and sent space-shuttles to explore other planets of the Universe . 
1497 So , these must be taken through food . 
1894 Heat transfers from a hot body to a cold body . 
225 He will also lose the ability to move around . 
583 The first men made fibre is rayon . 
958 FISHERMAN 'S NET Draw a circle among the players one should be a sherman . 
1134 Activity : Collect the folk song ' Mudal Kunigal Kere ' and try to sing it . 
1852 Many of them die prematurely for lack of treatment . 
545 Many things around us occur naturally as mixtures: salty sea water, moist air, soil, compost, rocks (mixture of minerals) to name a few. Many mixtures are man made, for instance; Coca Cola, paint, salad dressing and so forth. 
317 As a newcomer to the family , she has to adapt herself with the new environment . 
621 _________ by man . 
1133 It is also called money by order . 
1474 Write any differences between a train and an electromagnetic train . 
561 Where does she have the most potential energy? [ mark] 
258 Men for the first time started preserving information when they learnt how to write . 
178 When Alivardi Khan died in , Sirajuddaulah became the nawab of Bengal. The Company was worried about his power and keen on a puppet ruler who would willingly give trade concessions and other privileges. So it tried, though without success, to help one of Sirajuddaulah s rivals become the nawab. An infuriated Sirajuddaulah asked the Company to stop meddling in the political affairs of his dominion, stop fortification, and pay the revenues. After negotiations failed, the Nawab marched with , soldiers to the English factory at Kassimbazar, captured the Company officials, locked the warehouse, disarmed all Englishmen, and blockaded English ships. Then he marched to Calcutta to establish control over the Company s fort there. 
1382 Somu works round the year with the Sarpanch and gets one thousand rupees for the work . 
1600 Soil is a good habitat. We depend on it for agricultural and construction purposes, making utensils, toys etc. We have already learnt that plants depend on soil for nutrients like mineral salts and water from the soil in the chapter Nutrition in Plants. 
1824 c ) Compare the processes of evaporation and condensation of water . 
293 Will man be responsible for one more mass extinction ? 
148 Even he / she tries to help others at the cost of his own interest . 
1919 It has interest in the form and pattern of human events . 
1310 The vertebrate animals of chondrichthyes and osteichthyes are fish . 
945 The uprising began on October.Sensing trouble, Prime Minister Kerenskii had left the city to summon troops. At dawn, military men loyal to the government seized the buildings of two Bolshevik newspapers. Pro-government troops were sent to take over telephone and telegraph offices and protect the Winter Palace. In a swift response, the Military Revolutionary Committee ordered its supporters to seize government offices and arrest ministers. Late in the day, the ship Aurora shelled the Winter Palace. Other vessels sailed down the Neva and took over various military points. By nightfall, the city was under the committee s control and the ministers had surrendered. At a meeting of the All Russian Congress of Soviets in Petrograd, the majority approved the Bolshevik action. Uprisings took place in other cities. There was heavy fighting especially in Moscow but by December, the Bolsheviks controlled the Moscow-Petrograd area. 
215 You have learnt earlier the structure of a flower. You know that the flowers are the reproductive parts of a plant. The stamens are the male reproductive part and the pistil is the female reproductive part (Fig. .). 
894 After grabing the ball he should kick or throw to his partners . 
1632 Second step : The floor of the buccal cavity is raised . 
1984 Study , too requires extra vital force . 
483 An ancestor of man , who has practical knowledge of using weapons . 
1642 meteor: a small body of mass entering the Earth's atmosphere from space which emits light as a result of friction and heat, and appears as a streak of light 
476 Mixture Components Natural / Man made 
236 Determine the maximum velocity that she can reach when she skis to the bottom of the slope. 
1850 is more than that of Atmospheric pressure experienced is not uniform everywhere on the earth . 
158 He works in the office , industries , fields and runs business . 
1627 Figure . : Reverse push ) Position of ball : The ball is placed to inches ahead of right leg . 
1594 Physical components : The environment is largely dependent on certain physical factors . 
928 We place a resident, who really is king of the country, whatever injunctions of non-interference he may act under. As long as the prince acts in perfect subservience, and does what is agreeable to the residents, that is, to the British Government, things go on quietly; they are managed without the resident appearing much in the administration of affairs but when anything of a different nature happens, the moment the prince takes a course which the British Government think wrong, then comes clashing and disturbance. 
964 Man has the power to focus both eyes at the same time on objects in front of him . 
240 For this reason man cannot satisfy all his wants at a time . 
406 Charles Darwin Gordon Childe The Theory of Evolution was the single most significant doctrine that changed man 's outlook in the th century . 
1599 The diameter of capillaries is very narrow, and has high resistance. Therefore blood flows more slowly through them. 
1536 The stem of Peperomia Plant is transparent . 
1264 He passed the Secondary School Certificate Examination from Gopalganj Mission High School . 
854 What are the characteristics which make man different from other organisms ? 
659 He looks after the entire executive work of municipality besides providing the necessary information to the council . 
28 Which is the organism that is the most closely related to man from the evolutionary view point ? 
1420 There are a large number of activities which are the primary responsibility of the government. The government must spend on these. Providing health and education facilities for all is one example. We have discussed some of these issues in the first chapter. Running proper schools and providing quality education, particularly elementary education, is the duty of the government. India s size of illiterate population is one of the largest in the world. 
1102 And what is a tyre made of rubber ? 
1357 Gold and share markets are perfect competitive market . 
644 Make him lie down on his stomach , with head turned to a side . 
550 He couldn ' t have imagined then that the telephone would one day become such an inseparable part of our daily life . 
1478 Forest and wild life are examples of living resources . 
563 You have seen your mother cooking delicious food for you . 
214 In this system opportunities are created for the use of natural power and material resources for the welfare of man . 
530 There are many workmen around us . 
1229 . Explain the nature of the covalent bond using the bond formation in CHCl. 
1979 Sheep are reared in many parts of our country for wool. Table . gives the names of some breeds of sheep reared in our country for producing wool. The quality and texture of the fibres obtained from them is also indicated in the table. 
518 Man cannot take everything . 
1638 (vii) Problems that people in the industry face. 
551 I Foot work of players : In majority of the situations ( except backhand ) where the player moves within the court , he starts his movement with the right as the lead leg . 
64 Think of the following situation: You are all helping your teacher to rearrange the classroom and she asks you to move her desk from one side of the classroom to the other. How would you do that? The desk is too heavy for you to lift, so how do you get it across the classroom? 
1726 u = ; v = km h = m s- and 
1244 . How was the economic development of India visualised in the early decades after Independence? 
652 The school going girl who has the morning school can not take breakfast due to rush . 
1705 Thus even here , Jainism spread and many works were written in Kannada , Telugu and Tamil languages . 
523 Besides , if a man or animal is electrified don ' t touch him with bare hands . 
193 Hunting large animals may have taken many days of tracking to distant places this was probably done mostly by men. 
385 The herbivorous animals are also good source of vitamins for man . 
1364 Fig. . Energy ow in an ecosystem Energy ow is thus unidirectional and the loss at each stage is simply released into the environment as unusable heat.It is for this reason that a food chain will not have more than three or four trophic levels . 
1139 Ghee , butter , fat , oil of fish , fatty meat , yolk of eggs , milk , margarine , vegetables , oil of oil - seeds , mustard , sesame oil , linseed , maize , soybean , nut , coconut are the best examples of fatty food and oil . 
1667 as a political opponent of the Nazi regime 
973 Besides these , man misuse natural resources for their own comforts . 
1593 Write a comment on the closure of the forests to grazing from the standpoint of: 
932 Information about Nazi practices had trickled out of Germany during the last years of the regime. But it was only after the war ended and Germany was defeated that the world came to realise the horrors of what had happened. While the Germans were preoccupied with their own plight as a defeated nation emerging out of the rubble, the Jews wanted the world to remember the atrocities and sufferings they had endured during the Nazi killing operations also called the Holocaust. At its , a ghetto inhabitant had said to another that he wanted to outlive the war just for half an hour. Presumably he meant that he wanted to be able to tell the world about what had happened in Nazi Germany. This indomitable spirit to bear witness and to preserve the documents can be seen in many ghetto and camp inhabitants who wrote diaries, kept notebooks, and created archives. On the other hand when the war seemed lost, the Nazi leadership distributed petrol to its functionaries to destroy all incriminating evidence available in offices. 
1537 The establishment of Ganga dynasty , their contributions to art , architecture and literature . 
1390 The instrument used to measure blood pressure is a sphygmomanometer. This figure shows an automated arm blood pressure meter showing arterial hypertension. From the top reading systolic pressure is and diastolic reading is and the heart rate is beats per minute. 
81 Man knows about the art of bee keeping in the regions of early civilization. 
1359 Today we are surrounded by advertisements or ads as we call them. We watch these on television, listen to them on radio, see them on the streets and in newspapers and magazines. Even taxis and rickshaws carry advertisements on them. When we go to cinemas, we see advertisements before the film begins and on the Internet, they often pop-up when we go into different websites. What do advertisements do? How do they attract our attention? Read more to find out 
797 If a bee stings your friend , how would you help him ? 
1090 Many jackfruit trees have been cultivated in Modhupur and Bhawal region . 
19 When the raider 's back is towards the corner of the court and defender g. . Simple toe touch g. . Side Kick are covering the corners , the raider suddenly stops his forward movement , bends his knee and kicks straight with other leg side ways . 
534 Home became a need as man became civilized . 
1878 The money deposited by the depositors is given as credit to traders . 
1224 (a) Building rest houses for tourists in national parks. 
567 Man , cow , goat , buffalo , sheep , deer , whale etc . are examples of mammals . 
468 He is responsible for discharging duties related to the control of the force , training , operation and administration . 
874 In such case , he can use his scarce means to satisfy the prioritized wants only . 
1132 When the beaker is cold separate crystals of solid substances . 
1713 Coronary artery supplies blood to the heart muscle . 
1825 SI unit of time is a ) second b ) minute c ) week d ) day . hour = seconds . 
1757 Natural vegetation is generally classified in to three broad categories as follows: 
1024 These hills are formed of the sandstone , shales and mud . 
1206 In the rainy season , the sky is covered with dense clouds , and heavy rainfall occurs . 
1051 The band start as black patch and finally develop as band . 
1302 Weavers use warp, wept and zari in this process. First of all weaver put the thread roles on the vertical frame of the warping machine (Dolu) which is octagonal in shape. The warp is nearly meters long which can make sarees at a time. 
515 Peasants, Peasant women 
1215 In Minamata Bay of Japan , mercury entered water sources from industries and then into the body of sh . 
226 Man is unisexual . 
152 Due to these advantages , the mothers should help their child sleep in inverted position when the child attains two to three months of its age . 
694 Hair is a symbol of beauty for the Bengali women . 
1304 Rome was founded about years ago in the district of Latium , south of the Tiber River . 
1259 Bone : Bone is hard , fragile and unflexible skeletal connective tissue . 
911 Love your enemies, and pray for those who persecute you, that you may be children of your heavenly Father, for he makes his sun rise on the bad and the good, and causes rain to fall on the just and the unjust. 
22 But the water useful for plants , animals and man is decreasing day by day . 
1951 Muffler is used in winter season to cover neck and ears jointly . 
123 His official residence is the Rashtrapati Bhavan . 
1913 Are there any patterns in nature that give clues to modes of reproduction? 
1771 Mysuru Wodeyer opened three separate schools for Dalits on Swami Vivekananda 's advise . 
1938 The contraction and expansion of all cardiac muscles take part combindly . 
768 Man and other animals are directly dependent on plants . 
1508 Do you use wood , Activity Heat energy We Observe Hold a magnesium ribbon with tongs and burn it . 
664 Therefore the difference in her potential energy when moving from the top of the slope to the bottom is: 
1966 You may have noticed that most of these maps give more correct information of Europe and nearby countries. In fact they usually place Greece or Rome in the middle of the map. They also give more correct information about places visited by sailors and traders, on the coasts of various countries, but they did not know about the interior places. Thus on the map of Asia you can see India shown much smaller than Sri Lanka as the sailors were more familiar with it. 
343 Men invented fire with advancement of civilization and gradually learned how to cook . 
414 The wealth of a person was calculated on the number of cattle that he possessed . 
494 Man is being . 
1375 Let's now have a closer look at some of the most common sources of energy. 
371 This is possible as the weight of the man that is the force gets distributed over a number of nails . 
1521 Charles Babbage was born in London in England in the year . 
471 He plays an important role in maintaining good relationship between the Centre and the State . 
1994 b. Self Employment : Picture : . To eradicate the widespread unemployment in India the most effective way is the creation of self employment . 
389 ?How does the poet describe his relationship with the deity? 
1668 It is also known as environmental science . 
1212 Can only farmers like you sell in Rythu Bazaars? 
1110 For example , nutrients enter into the roots of plants in solution . 
27 Chain catch enables all the players in the cahin to catch hold of the raider when he rushes towords a weak player . 
787 Think of some sports which only girls or only boys participate. 
1036 These observations suggest that a force applied on an object may change its speed. If the force applied on the object is in the direction of its motion, the speed of the object increases. If the force is applied in the direction opposite to the direction of motion, then it results in a decrease in the speed of the object. 
1318 A food chain is a series of nutrient and energy changes that moves through a chain of organisms. It always begins with a producer and terminates with decomposers. Below is an example of a simple food chain in a grassland ecosystem. The arrows show the movement of energy from one organism to another. 
1790 Experiment Take three samples namely , iron pieces , copper wire and charcoal . 
612 Man has to go out daily for various activities . 
1606 This finding was accepted globally and he was awarded the Nobel prize for this contribution . 
1338 How does the length of the shadow change with time? Illustrate your answer with the help of some diagrams. Draw the diagrams of the stick and its shadow for different times, that is, at am, am, noon, pm, and pm. 
570 Education makes a man polite and gentle . 
1736 There are some activities, which the government has to support. The private sector may not continue their production or business unless government encourages it. For example, selling electricity at the cost of generation may push up the costs of production of goods in many industries. Many units, especially small-scale units, might have to shut down. Government here steps in by producing and supplying electricity at rates which these industries can afford. Government has to bear part of the cost. 
100 His personality is enhanced . 
83 In other words , men do not get the resources which are needed to satisfy the unlimited wants . 
1697 In the cities , there used to be guilds among the people following different occupations . 
871 Boys help their fathers in gardening at home and cleaning yards and fields outside the house . 
1194 Na(s) + HO(l) NaOH(aq) + H(g) + heat energy 
815 Who will do some specific works , how will these be done , when will be done , why are these to be done etc . , all these are related to her duties and responsibilities . 
1874 Hot water does not affect cotton fabric . 
1574 They are thus able to arrange for the capital needed . 
1222 Electrical appliances which work on Magnetic effect of electric current : Are magnetism and electricity related ? 
200 He should be kept in isolation . 
1598 Mist : When water vapour condenses and remains in the air above the earth 's surface , it is known as mist . 
1026 Also , aquatic plants do not grow there . 
1087 Seasonal foods are fresh , natural and pure in taste and flavour . 
750 He depends on the land for his existence . 
212 . A carpenter who makes wooden furniture, needs accuracy in measurments. Do you ever notice how he measures? How whould you appreciate him. 
218 The farmer in USA works like a businessman and not like a peasant farmer. 
1980 Exercises I. Four alternatives are given under each complete / incomplete statement . 
556 That means he has lost his capacity for doing work . 
1677 Guns could be bought or captured and turned against the invaders. But not diseases such as smallpox to which the conquerors were mostly immune. 
279 As for example , a singer , by singing and a doctor , by his medical services , create utilities . 
939 By going to bed early and getting up early , a man 's health and mental ability increase . 
350 Since a human being is a social being , he always longs to live with other human being . 
1340 . Explain why cricket became popular in India and the West Indies. Can you give reasons why it did not become popular in countries in South America? 
759 Your friend sat down after he had run one kilometre . 
1262 The word arbitrary has been used earlier in this book and you ve read what the word means in the Glossary of Chapter . The word sedition has been included in the Glossary of this chapter. Read the Glossary descriptions of both words and then answer the following questions: 
1611 The powers and functions of the Legislative Assembly are : The Legislative Assembly is , in reality , the Legislature of the State . 
1257 A material which gets decomposed through natural processes, such 
1829 Green plants manufacture food by the process of photosynthesis . 
1787 Some of the nebulae are full of gaseous bodies . 
1347 They changed : Production system Diversified products Volume of production Organisation of production This has resulted in : Figure - . - Oil Refining Tremendous increase the consumption of fossil energy like coal , petrol , etc in Figure . - Coal Mining Figure . Air Pollution from factories Faster urbanization Drastic jump in transport sector Following commercialization agriculture , there is : Deforestation for the cultivation of of commercial crops Reckless/excessive use of fertilizer for boosting production Large scale use of pesticides No doubt , all the above factors have led to a manifold increase in production . 
1408 Animals store vitamins in liver , muscles , and other parts of the body . 
1022 If he says solid , the players who stand near the cards of solids will be out . 
13 Others can not help him . 
1299 You have learnt that our body is like a wonderful machine that performs respiration , blood circulation , digestion and excretion . 
1190 ( 10 ) Employment : Starting from fish cultivation to fish catching ; 
557 He was unable to run further . 
634 He should be given enough liquid diet so that toxic element in the body should be washed out with urine . 
1750 We should make necessary arrangements to shift essential household goods, domestic animals and vehicles, etc. to safer places. 
1924 (ii) Plants carry out photosynthesis only during the day and 
505 These bulbils give rise to new plants when get detached from the mother plant and fall on the ground . 
1875 Under the sustained pressure of the movement for abolition of devadasi system, the classical dance of South India was almost wiped out by the first quarter of the th century, even in Tamil Nadu. With complete loss of employment and patronage devadasi artistes had to undergo a lot of trial and tribulation. 
458 The Panch can impose fines and may even force a person to leave the village or even order all other Gonds not to have any relation with him (prohibition). 
1097 Who among the following is praised during the practice of Suryanamaskara a. Moon d. Sun b. Planets c. Earth . 
1885 When you go to a rabbit farm as a field trip , list the questions that are to be asked . 
1955 Complete the table Table . Situation Name the form of energy before transformation Name the form of energy after transformation Combustion of petrol Combustion of LPG Burning match stick Running toy car Photosynthesis Falling rain drop Flowing water from a dam Sl . 
986 Suppose one of your friends broke his arm or leg while playing football or upon falling from a tree . 
1867 It grows there for the next six months . 
1142 Many comets are known to appear periodically. One such comet is Halley s comet, which appears after every years. It was last seen in . Can you tell when Halley s comet will be visible again? 
595 Mother will do all the household chores . 
913 The farmer told them that he was growing wheat and had just added manure to the soil to make it more fertile. He told the children that the wheat would fetch a good price in the mandi from where it would be taken to factories to make bread and biscuits from flour. 
772 How much depth farmer plough his field? 
919 He would have committed the same mistake again and again . 
1111 when yeast is added to the dough for preparing bread, the dough rises. This is due to the production of carbon dioxide gas during the process of fermentation. Bubbles of the gas fill the dough, increase its volume and make it spongy in nature. 
878 If he used tractor measure its plough nail s length. 
1495 Use your knowledge of the different types of bonding to explain the following statements: 
769 Fifthly, we use language to tell others about what we feel and experience. Suppose an early hunter-gatherer saw a tree full of ripe fruits in a far off place, how could she, if she couldn t use any language, tell her friends what she found and where? Suppose you are hurt and in pain, how can you tell your parents about it without using any language? 
1007 Do people in your area conserve water? How? 
40 To assist the teacher in various tasks is his main duty . 
547 He should observe the movements of attacking side and give special attention to the attacking player as well as the ball . 
961 When the sprinter comes very close to the nish line he immidiatly pushes his shoulder to complete his race . 
1954 According to the Census Report , 2001 , the population of Bangladesh is about 12 . 93 crore , the rate of increase is 1 . 48 per cent and the density of population is about 876 persons per square kilometre . 
1336 You may have noticed that they do not have to learn anything new to survive . 
1267 Crops : A variety of crops are grown in Asia . 
95 The nature is at her best in this division . 
1567 City people cannot be trusted, they are cunning and corrupt. 
1463 . Suggest reasons why women in nineteenth century India were obliged to continue wearing traditional Indian dress even when men switched over to the more convenient Western clothing. What does this show about the position of women in society? 
1968 Firstly, Shanti was given a copy of the chargesheet and all other evidence that the prosecution presented against her. Shanti was charged with the offence of theft that was defined as a crime in the law. The trial was held in an open court, in public view. Her brother, Sushil could attend the court hearings. The trial was held in the presence of the accused. Shanti was defended by a lawyer. Shanti s lawyer, Advocate Roy was given an opportunity to cross-examine all the prosecution witnesses. Advocate Roy was given an opportunity to present witnesses in Shanti s defence. 
754 These are the responsibilities and duties of a home manager towards her family . 
665 like Worms tapeworm , hook worm and roundworm live in the small intestine of man . 
714 He who took the land on Kanam tenure was the Kanam tenant . 
1767 In simple situations such as when you are standing on the ground or the go-cart is travelling along a level surface, then the normal force is equal to the weight of the object, but in the opposite direction. Think back to what we learnt about forces acting in pairs. On a flat, level surface, the normal force is the reaction force to the weight of the object. This is shown in the diagram for a box resting on the floor. 
502 As a result , the necessary fund for her economic development can not be mobilized internally . 
851 A minister flags off a new train in his constituency a week before polling day. 
1849 substances by hand picking Activity . : Take a handful of soil . 
323 b ) Shoulder touching : - When the active defender enters the middle line and runs parallel to the active chaser on the other side , the chaser can stretch his nearest hand and touch the shoulder of the defender . 
424 The Sultans were advised:-A slave, whom one has brought up and promoted, must be looked after for it needs a whole lifetime and good luck to find a worthy and experienced slave. Wise men have said that a worthy and experienced slave is better than a son - 
1208 According to the prevailing climate , the continent can be divided into seven climatic zones ( Fig . 58 ) . 
1813 Look at Figs. (a), (b) and (c). Notice how the Princely States disappear in (b). Identify the new states that were formed in and later and the languages of these states. 
573 Construction of houses were started by the civilized man as the need for a home increased in accordance with the changes in society . 
1931 It moves and needs to find its own food so it must be an animal . 
1066 of cross bar from begining to nish of the event . 
366 Kitchen is the working place for the women . 
940 They discharge their duties by helping their mothers giving breakfast to the guests and making rooms tidy . 
1564 . You have learnt about the importance of preserving water. Prepare a poster on the proper usage of water mentioning the dos and don ts to conserve the water from wastage. 
1167 Iodine -- Essential for production of thyroxin hormone . 
1724 Both men and women can increase their income by being self - employed through these activities . 
71 In the space below, explain what you think the role of the male and female bodies are in reproduction. 
1499 Different animal fat , vegetable oil , such as coconut oil , palm oil , mahua oil , custard oil , olive oil and animal oil viz grease , cod liver oil etc . are the source of fat for soap making . 
1934 Coffee Among non-food crops South America is an important producer of coffee and cocoa . 
1687 Gradually breaking down and building up of chemical substances started . 
204 She should ensure a proper security system in placing and preserving all the instrument . 
1346 The area of the drainage basin of these three rivers is 16 , 00 , 000 square kilometres altogether of which only 7 . 5 percent area is in Bangladesh . 
1120 Our dear pal ozone - oxygen , again - Puts up a valiant defence in vain . 
1962 If the frequency of vibration is between 20 and 20 , 000 per second , it can produce audible sound . 
717 Islam propagated strict monotheism or submission to one God. It also rejected idol worship and considerably simplified rituals of worship into collective prayers. At the same time Muslim scholars developed a holy law called Shariat. The Sufis often rejected the elaborate rituals and codes of behaviour demanded by Muslim religious scholars. They sought union with God much as a lover seeks his beloved with a disregard for the world. Like the saint-poets, the Sufis too composed poems expressing their feelings, and a rich literature in prose, including anecdotes and fables, developed around them. Among the great Sufis of Central Asia were Ghazzali, Rumi and Sadi. Like the Nathpanthis, Siddhas and Yogis, the Sufis too believed that the heart can be trained to look at the world in a different way. They developed elaborate methods of training using zikr (chanting of a name or sacred formula), contemplation, sama (singing), raqs (dancing), discussion of parables, breath control, etc. under the guidance of a master or pir. Thus emerged the silsilas, a genealogy of Sufi teachers, each following a slightly different method (tariqa) of instruction and ritual practice. 
222 But her agriculture is underdeveloped and productivity is low . 
926 Teacher : A teacher helps his students with his teachings to be good human beings . 
490 She should take steps to fulfill demands of family within scarce resources . 
1293 Look carefully at how the tendon joins the muscle. 
857 On the other hand a civil case is always lodged by a person who feels that he has suffered due to the cheating or breach of contract. 
